- Alienation in community -> connections w/ each other, artists are trusted
- Artist facilitates change
- Society now is dependent on single saviors, mankind is not good enough so we imagine heroes.
- Existentialism
    - Condemned to freedom, understand place in world, expect action, must be connected to society
    - No religion in art, search for meaning, dignity of the individual, concern for human subjectivity
- Modernism
    - Wright's Falling Water
        - Closer we are to nature the better lives will be, built to fit into environment.
    - Margaret Bourke-White
        - Portraying the repressed.
        - Migrant mother, with kids, wrinkles, worn face, and kids turn away from camera.
    - Hopper's Nighthawks
        - Isolation of modern society, usuallly single individual, we are part of such a huge existence and energetic city, but we are still isolated.
        - Uses a lot of open space, light and shadows,, uses glass to show the fragility of life.
        - Single house, etc. EMPTINESS
- Abstract-Expressionism
    - Georgia O'Keefe
        - Flowers, Simplifies form, not much detail but uses simple form, color, line.
    - Pollock (Jack the Dripper)
        - Would cut off the edges of the canvas so it goes on before, infinity, paint floating in space.
        - Subconcious mind.
    - Mondrian
        - Creates equilibrium with primary colors, balance. Pure colors = harmony
    - Kandinsky
        - Random color, kind of interpret it.
    - Rothko
        - Paintings shoulld stand alone, stand in front of it and immerse yourself in the colors and experience emotions, fields of color.
- Pop Art
    - Warhol
        - Anti-natural publicity posters, not detailed or realistic, in strange colors. Fading away.
    - Lichtenstein
        - Comic book imagery, benday dots = pixels, romance comics,
