# Prelude to Reformation (13.1)
- Reformation came from ***Christian/Northern Renaissance Humanism*** which tried to reform Christianity
## Christian or Renaissance Humanism
- Focus on classicism of biblical text and writings of church fathers (Augustine, Ambrose, and Jerome)
- ***Reform program*** = humans can reason/improve through education in Christian antiquity, bringing about schools and new editions of classics (To improve society you need to improve the humans)
### Desiderius Erasmus ( popularized and formulized Reform Program)
- *The Handbook of the Christian Knight* - Christianity should be a guiding philosophy in life. Emphasize inner piety.
- Rewrote the Latin, ***Vulgate*** which contained errors and wrote ***Annotations*** a commentary on the Vulgate. 
- Wrote ***The Praise of Folly*** which criticizes the corrupt clergy.
- Erasmus worked within the Church but laid foundation for Lutheranism and the Reformation.
### Thomas More
- More wrote controversial ***Utopia*** an idealistic novel about a communal social/political system.
- He served ***King Henry VIII*** (many wives guy) who wasn't perfect, but More was a realist as well.
- Against heresy and sought persecution of those changing Catholic Church
- Died opposing break from Roman Catholic Church due to King Henry VIII's divorce.
## Church and Religion on the Eve of Reformation
- Church was corrupt. Pluralism, where same official held multiple offices, and absenteeism, where officials hired underlings and ignored their duties.
### The Search for Salvation
- Frederick the Wise, Martin Luther's prince, had 19,000 holy relics which had attach indulgences reducing time in purgatory by millions of years he sold these.
-  ***Modern Devotion*** was a mystical movement, said you have to do good things for salvation regardless of education/reading.
    - ***The Imitation of Christ*** by Thomas Kempis highlighted this idea.
- People devoutly followed the Catholic Church, but people started to realize it's BS with Luther.
### Calls for Reform
- Franciscans, Dominicans, and Auguistinian religious groups emphasized preaching to the people.
    - Tried to reform the church from the inside, like  ***Johannes Geiler of Kaiserberg*** who denounced clerical corruption.
- ***Oratory of Divine Love*** was a group of clergy + laymen, who developed spiritually through outward acts of charity. Followed Erasmus's "philosophy of Christ".
    - Spanish Archbishop, Cardinal Ximenes, actively reformed and translated Kempis's The Imitation of Christ to Spanish.
