# The Impact of European Expansion (13.4)
- Spain and Portugal started out winning, then Dutch, then British and French who feuded, but British won.
## The Conquered
- Native Americans completely wrecked by European diseases, and culture wiped out.
- In West Africa, slave trade canceled out pop. growth, and caused internal wars, making territories easier to take over for the British.
- Portuguese trading posts in the East did little, but Dutch controlled Indonesian area
- China and Japan were not affected much, but India was being taken over by British.
- Latin America not strict about interracial stuff
    - Mestizos (Spanish + Native Americans) authorzied by Spain in 1501.
    - Mulatos (black + white) happened after slaves brought to Spain.
### Catholic Missionaries
- Dominicans, Franciscans, and Jesuits dominated new world missionaries
- Started missions which converted indians and served as military barriers
- Catholoic church made hospitals, orphanages, schools and nunneries where woman were allowed to work.
    - ***Sor Juana Ines de la Cruz*** = nun writing poetry + help women education
- Christian missionaries (Jesuits esp.) went to China and brought tech to impress Chinese.
    - Compared Christian morality and Confucian ethics ( ***Matteo Ricci*** was 1 italian missionary)
    - 300k chinese converted, but Jesuits, Dominicans, and Franciscans couldn't agree on outlawing ancestor worship and Chinese supressed Christians.
- Shikoku and Kyushu became Christian, but Japanese got mad at destruction of temples, idols so Tokugawa Ieyasu expelled all missionaries.

## The Conquerors
- Spaniards --> Mexico for wealth, lack of women and male death rate made upward mobility better for women.
- Spanish greedy for gold and silver, and tons mined and sent to Port Seville for trade affecting the economy
- ***Columbian exchange*** brought horses, cattle, wheat to US and potatoes, chocolate, corn, tomatoes, and tobacco to Europe, potatoes especially improved nutrition and population.
    - Coffee and chocolate became popular in London and Spain resp., Chinese furniture + porcelain popular.
- Anglo-Dutch trade wars, British-French rivalry in India, and piracy from European Expansion
- Flemish cartogropher ***Gerar-dus Mercator*** created the Mercator projection from the explorations that represented a sphere more accurate at the equator but all lines had right direction.
- European success reinforced Europe's ideas of their inherent superiority.
