# Toward a World Economy (14.5)
- World market kind of began after European exploration and trade.
## Economic Conditions in the Sixteenth Century
- Inflation across Europe known as the ***price revolution***, but affected places at diff times at about 2-3% per year. Food had most price change, esp.. in the Mediterranean area.
    - Wages didn't match inflation, laborers had poorer standard of living, but rich got richer may have been driving force in growth of capitalism.
    - Governments were screwed by inflation, adding more taxes and getting debt.
    - Happened b/c of influx of raw materials from new world, as well as population increases.
## The Growth of Commercial Capitalism
- Dutch monopolized world trade but were challgned by English and French.
- ***joint-stock company*** made it easier for commercial organization. Investors got 30% returns on Dutch EIC in first year.
- ***Jacob Fugger*** got a monopoly on mines in Habsburg central Europe in exchance for arranging loans for Charles V. He made huge profits, but went bankrupt when Habsburgs defaulted.
- ***Bank of Amsterdam*** had stock trading and was hub of European buisness, replacing Antwerp (wall street)
- European economy still dependent on agriculture most free of serfdom. Peasants situation got even worst in Europe with new serfdom.
## Mercantilism
- ***Mercantilism*** = total trade volume unchangeable: shoarded materials, protectionist trade policies, and encouraged. more trade in vs. trade out. Prosperity = Bullion = gold + silver.
- Granting trade monopolies, encourage investment, subsidize, importing artisans, infrastructure, and tarrifs.
- Government needs to intervene in economy for national good
## Overseas Trade and Colonies: Movement Toward Globalization
- Valuable trans-oceanic trade was occuring, bringing back importaint goods that spread to artisans and merchants.
- Trade within Europe remained stable, but overseas trade boomed. The global economy emerged here b/c of this influx of global trade. Europe, Asia, the East, and the Americas now traded.
