# 15.1
- Everone's economies were failing, attributed to rising and then fall of temperatures.
## Witchcraft Craze
- Church connected witchcraft to heresy, and the Inquisition persecuted the witches.
### The Spread of Witchcraft
- Upwards of 100,000 people persecuted, spread from cities to smaller towns.
- Said to have sworn allegiance to the devil and attend nocturnal gatherings or ***sabbats***
- Religious turmoil speculated to be cause as trials more common in Protestant areas.
- Old women were good scapegoats for the poverty everywhere
- ***Nicholas Rémy***, a witchcraft judge in France, claims both genders can be witches.
, though women were considered inferior and able to be binded by sex with Satan so more likely.
### Decline 
- Withcraft hysteria subsided as governments stabalized, and educated people questioned it. 
## The Thirty Years' War
### Background to the War
- Started in Holy Roman Empire w/ Catholicism vs. Calvinism but became Bourbon vs. Habsburg
- Peace of Augsburg didn't give Calvinist rights, so the Calvaniist ruler of Platinate, ***the Elector Palatine Frederick IV*** lead German Protestant states in Protestant Union.
- ***Duke Maximilian of Bavaria***, organized Catholic League of German states to counteract Protestants.
- Habsburg with assistance from Spain, wanted to consolidate authority in the HRE.
- The princes opposing them fought for ***German liberties*** (rights as individual rulers) and turned to enemy's of Spain (esp. France).
### The Bohemian Phase
- After accepting Catholic Habsburg ***Archduke Ferdinand*** as King, Calvinist nobles rebelled against his re-catholicization of Bohemia, electing ***Frederick V*** instead, the head of the Protestant Union.
- Ferdinand who was elected emperor of HRE resisted deposition, seeking the aid of Duke Maximilianof Bavaria and the Catholic League to defeat Frederick and Bohemian nobles at the Battle of White Mountain.
- Spanish invaded Frederick's Palatinate, and Frederick fled to the United Provinces, Bohemia became Habsburg and Spanish renewed attack on Dutch.
### The Danish Phase
- Lutheran ***King Christian IV of Denmark*** intervened for Protestant cause, leading an army into Northern Germany.
- ***Albrecht von Wallenstein*** was Ferdinand's OP new commandor who defeated a Protestant army at Dessau, and then Christian IV's army was defeated by the Catholic League under Count Tilly and then Wallenstein wrecked him.
- Emperor Ferdinand II issued the Edit of Restitution in 1629 which prohibited Calvinist worship. German princes made him dismiss Wallenstein in fear of their independence.
### The Swedish Phase
- Lutheran ***Gustavus Adolphus***, King of Sweden, lead army to heart of Germany, where he beat Wallenstein in the ***Battle of Lützen***, but was defeated by the imperial army in the ***Battle of Nördlingen***
- Ferdinand annulled the Edict of Restitution to make peace with German princes.
### The Franco-Swedish Phase
- ***Cardinal Richelieu*** the chief minister of French ***King Louis XIII*** entered the war directly. Religious themes weren't even the issue anymore.
- In ***The Battle of Rocroi*** French beat Spanish and imperialist Bavarian armies. 
- ***Peace of Westphalia*** in 1648 ended the war in Germany, but Spain and France continued fighting until ***Peace of the Pyrenees*** in 1659.
### Outcomes of the War
- Peace of Westphalia ensured all German states free to deterimine their religion, France gained parts of Western Germany, seperating religion and politics.
- Habsburg power diminished, HRE states became independent.
- Pope was ignored in all decisions, marking beginning of secular sovereign states operating as euqls.
- Some parts of Germany screwed economically but others were fine.
- Painting: "The Thirty Years' War: soldiers Plundering a Village"
## Was There a Military Revolution?
- Military technology revolutionized the miltary, with conscripts, with musketeers and pikemen. Gustavus's men used ***the salvo***, where all rows of infantry fired at once, followed by pike charges.
- Gustavus also used pistol volley and charged enemy with swords, mobile artillery, requiring careful training and moving away from mercenary forces.
- Military's got larger, and military schools established along with ifrearms replacing pike.
- Naval arms race began and ships had heavy artillery, which required heavy taxes and large bureaucracies supervising military of state governments.
## Rebellions
- Many rebellions throughout course of Thirty Years' War
    - 1590-1640 low class revolts in France, Austria, and Hungary
    - 1640-1650 Portugal and Catalonia rebelled against Spanish Government
    - Commoners of Naples and Scicily revolted, and Russia had many urban uprisings
    - Nobels rebelled in France, as well as in Sweden, Denmark, and the United Provinces.
    - Importaint Civil war/Rebellion in England became known as the English Revolution
