# Chapter 15.2 - The Practice of Absolutism: Western Europe
- ***absolutism*** ultimate authority in the hands of the king ruling by divine right
    - Jean Bolin believed power consisted of authority for taxes, laws, justice, administrative system, foreign policy
- ***divine right monarchy*** power given by God, only responsible to God, but limited in reality
    - Bishop Jacques Bossuet's *Drawn from the Very Words of Holy Scripture* argued this
## Absolute Monarchy in France
- France in reign of Louis XIV best practice of absolute monarchy
- France influenced all levels of society + political affairs + the imitation of Louis's court
### Foundations of French Absolutism: Cardinal Richelieu
- 50 yrs prior gov avoid breakdown of state, bc other kings, XIII and XIV only boys, so ruled by ministers
- Cardinal Richelieu, chief minister (1624 1642) eliminated political and military rights of Huguenots to transform them into more religious subjects
- Respected role played by nobility, slowly used spies to uncover noble plots and crush the conspirator nobles.
- Sent out ***intendants*** to execute orders, and conflicted with provincial governments. Their victories strengthened the crown
- Bad financial system where people benefited from inefficiencies.
    - ***Taille*** increased a ton (annual direct tax on land or property), but expenditure due to foreign policy of confronting Habsburgs in 30 yrs war contributed more
### Cardinal Mazarin
- Richelieu died in 1642, Louis XIII died shortly after, Louis XIV took throne, 4 yrs old,. Anne of Austria as regent, but let Cardinal Mazarin rule
- Wasn't well liked leading to revolt of the nobles (***Fronde***), where nobles teamed up with Paris's Parlement who opposed 30 yrs. war taxes.
- Parlement was important, formed ***nobles of the robe***, led first Fronde 1648-1649, ended in compromise
- Second Fronde 1650-1652, led by ***nobles of the sword***, descended from medieval nobility, but they got wrecked.
- Louis XIV took over after Mazarin's death in 1661
## The Reign of Louis XIV (1643-1715)
- Louis determined to become a real king (sole ruler of France)
- Establish spectacle of the court of Versailles, setting standard for other monarchies
- However, monarchy/ gov not as centralized because Provinces had own courts, Estates had own laws, Nobility had much authority, towns and provinces had many privileges and powers.
### Administration of the Government
- Key's to Louis's power: restructure central policy-making bc part of his own court and household
- Palace of Versailles was the personal household, seat of central government, place  to get favors and offices, where opposing factions jostled for power
- Biggest danger to Louis in the high nobles and royal princes wishing to assert policy-making role of minister but Louis removed them from royal council, and preoccupied them with his court life.
- Louis relied on other ministers, giving him power over foreign policy, war, secular power, taxes
- Louis had less success with internal administration, traditional institutions too powerful for the king. Louis needed to bribe people to execute policies
- Had both political and economic control over **parlements**, provincial low courts
### Religious Policy
- Maintain religious harmony as duty of monarch. 
- Louis didn't want protestants in France, "One king, one law, one faith", minority faith undermined his political authority,
- Issue ***Edict of Fontainebleau***, destruction of Huguenot churches, closed Protestant schools, Huguenots defied and sough asylum, supported by Catholic laypeople
- Tried to regain control of heavy Protestant regions.
### Financial Issues
- Cost overwhelming, build palaces, maintain court, pursue war
- Had the services of ***Jean-Baptiste Colbert*** controller general of finances
    - Adhered to **mercantilism** stressing gov. regulation to benefit state.
    - Founded new luxury industries to decrease need for imports, and increase exports
        - Royal tapestry at Beauvais, Venetian glassmakers, Flemish clothmakers
    - Regulated quality, oversaw training, special privileges to entrepreneur ie. subsidies, loan, tax exempt Regulations evaded, and French trading to late to be competitive
- Louis outspent income though, depleting treasury, but Colbert's policies allowed for greater economic growth.
### Daily life at the Court of Versailles
- 1660 convert hunting lodge with enormous sums and thousands of workers for enormous palace
- Court of Louis XIV set standard for other European rulers. Versailles as symbol of French absolutist state and power. Intended to awe and impress
- Versailles multipurpose, residence of king, reception hall for state affairs, home of thousands of officials and courtiers. Home of high nobility and royal princes
- Excluded nobles from real power, but gave them the appearance of power
- King had little privacy with daily ceremonies carefully staged with nobles chosen to help to dress the king
- Demeaning them reduced great nobles and ecclesiastics, giving Louis control.
    - Preventing them from interfering. "people of quality" expected to adhere to rigid standards to maintain prestige
    - Nobles participated in order to receive offices, titles, pensions.
- Nobles ranked in elaborate orders of seniority, who sits where is important (Westview Robotics level beauracracy)
- Numerous forms of entertainment: walks in gardens, boating, performances, concerts, ballets
- Louis held *appartement* 3 evenings a week 7 - 10, relaxed at home to court, concert with cards, and buffet
### The Wars of Louis XIV
- Objectives
    1. Conquer New territory
    2. French dominance
    3. Weaken rivals
    4. Personal glory
- Louis is advancing France through his own advancement (said Voltaire)
- Louis wanted to expand empire and huge army was built under secretary of war ***François-Michel Le Tellier***, marquis of Louvois.  
#### In 1667 Louis invaded the Spanish Netherlands and Franche-Comté but the triple aliance ***Dutch, English, Swedes*** intervened and made Louis 1668, only gaining a few towns in Spanish Netherlands. (**First war**) ***War of Devolution***
- Initiates Secret Treaty of Dover where they double teamed the Dutch
- Louis created 400k men army, and he created a lot of war because of it.
- Habsburg Dominance -> Removes the influence the Habsburgs had.
#### Got mad at the Triple Alliance, and invaded the United Provinces (Dutch Republic) (**Second war**) with success. Brandenburg, Spain and HRE formed alliance and forced him to end Dutch War with ***Peace at Nimwegen*** where France recieved Franch-Comte from spain. ***Franco-Dutch War*** (1672-1678)
- Rampjaar (1672) was a disaster year (minister and brother executed)
- Wiliam III, the Prince of Orange, became ***Stadtholder***  of Holland, Zealand, Utrecht, Gelderland, Overissef, flooded the Dutch land in attempt to avoid Louis.
- ***Admiral Michiel de Ruyter*** - Master Of
#### *Invaded* HRE, winning Alsace, Lorraine, and the city of Strasbourg. This occupation led to creation of League of Augsburg (Spain, HRE, United Provinces, Sweden, England) and third war (***War of the League of Augsburg***([1689-1697]).
- William III king of England and Mary III Glorious Revolution of 1688. Anglo-Dutch alliance.
- The Grand Alliance - Britain, Austria, Prussia, Dutch Republic, Portugal, Savoy united against Louis leading to the 9 years war.
- This war brought famine, and depression to France
- Treaty of Ryswick ended war forcing Louis to give up most of his conquered land, except Strasbourg and part of Alsace. (not worth the deaths)
#### Final fourth war, ***War of the Spanish Succession***, was for Spanish throne. **1701-1714**
- Sickly Charles II left throne to grandson of Louis XIV who became King Philip V of Spain. Charles II was severely inbred.
- Grand Aliance: English, United Provinces, Habsburg Austria, and German Coalition formed to prevent Bourbon monopoly, which would break balance of power. Was literally surrounded by enemies.
- War lasted eleven years, even in colonial North America, he saved france and achieved a draw.
- Coalition brought doun Louis's forces especially b/c of John Churchill.
- War ended w/ Peace of Utrecht in 1713 and Peace of Rastatt in 1714 confirming Phllip V as the Spanish ruler, establishing Bourbon dynasty, but they also seperated Spain and France.
  - Spanish Netherlands, Milan, Naples given to Austria and Brandenburg-Prussia gained land.
  - England really won, with Gibraltar, Newfoundland, Hudson Bay Territory, and Nova Scotia. They were smart and focused on naval power, thinking forward.
  - Then the Sun King died, remembered as a failure since France in debt.
  - Not a unified Burboun monarchy, 
## The Decline of Spain
- Phillip II bankrupted Spain in 1596 from war. Phillip III did the same in 1607 on the court.
- Army was out of date and govt. inefficient, weakining commercial class amidst pesantry.
- Oversupply of clergy and a luxury loving noble class.
- Phillip II's reign revealed Spain's weaknesses: court luxury, miracle relics.
    - Greedy duke of Lerma ran the country, who accumulated wealth and power for his family.
### The Reign of Phillip IV
- Phillip IV revived Spanish through his chief minister, ***Gaspar de Guzman*** who dominated Spain and reived the interests of monarchy.
- Limited power of Catholic Church and aristocracy and reformed the political system, which centralized Spanish government.
    - These efforts didn't succeed because Spanish aristocrats were too powerful.
- Internal revolts and unsuccesfull military compaigns of the 30 yrs war, were expensive and failed. Led by ***Olivares and Philip***
- Spain pretty much lost most of it's foreign territory
    - Dutch lost in Peace of Westphalia in 1648, border defenses Spanish Netherlands lost in Peace of the Pyrenees in 1659.
