# Chapter 15.3 - Absolutism in Central, Eastern, and Northern Europe
- Development of Modern World made Prussia, Austria, and Russia gain power.
##  The German States
- The Peace of Westphalia left the HRE divided into sovereign states from which Prussia and Austria emerged.
### The Rise of Brandenburg-Prussia
- Brandenburg became powerful due to the ruling Hohenzollem dynasty, which inhereted land in Rhine valley and the duchy of Prussia (East Prussia).
- Had three disconnected masses of land in western, central, and eastern Germany.
- ***Frederick William the Great Elector*** built a large standing army, that was sustained through taxation under the General War Commisarat.
- Officials of General War Commisarat, were members of the Prussian aristocracy, ***the Junkers*** who were officers too.
- Frederick William bribed the nobles into letting him control their provincial Estates-General.
    - Reinforced serfdom through his bribes (gave nobles power over peasants).
- Followed mercantilist policies, while continuing to favor nobles over middle class.
- Frederick William's son ***Frederick III*** became King Frederick I in exchange for helping the Holy Roman Emperor.
### The Emergence of Austria
- Habsburg's gave up on empire in Germany, and transitioned to Austria.
- Austrian hereditary possessions comprised the state, along with Bohemia, and NW Hungary.
    - Possesions were: Lower and Upper Austria, Carinthia, Carniola, Styria, and Tyrol
- ***Leopold I*** wanted to move Austria westward, but  challenged b/c of Ottomans who moved west and laid siege to Vienna in 1683.
    - Austrians counterattacked, and by the ***Treaty of Karlowitz*** in 1699, Austria took control of Hungary, Transylvania, Croatia, and Slovenia.
    - Austria gained Spanish Netherlands, Milan, Mantua, Sardinia, and Naples.
- *Struggle  with centralization b/c of many different national groups, but Austria was still p strong in population and military strength*
    - Habsburg was archduke of Austria, king of Bohemia, and king of Hungary with each having own Estates-General
## Italy: From Spanish to Austrian Rule
- Charles V arbiter of Italy, gave the duchy of Milan to Philip II and transferred Italy to Spanish monarchy.
- Florence, Papal States, and Venice remained independent but the oppresive Spanish Counter-Reformation was oppresive.
- From War of the Spanish Succession, Austria got Milan, Mantua, Sardinia, Naples and became dominant Italian power.
## Russia: From Fledglin Principality to Major Power
- ***Ivan IV the Terrible*** was the first tsar of Russia, who expanded Russia eastward.
    - Ivan crushed Russian nobilitiy (***boyars***), but when died aristocratic resurged in the ***Time of Troubles*** and didn'tstop until the national assembly, ***Zemsky Sobor*** chose ***Michael Romanov*** as the new tsar.
- Strict social hierarchy lead to peasant + merchant revolts as well as a schism in Russian Orthodox Church.
### The Reign of Peter the Great
- Peter tried to westernize or Europeanize Russia.A Modernization gave him powerful army/navy.
- Peter created a huge army of 210,000 men and the first Russian navy.
- Peter reorganized government to match Westernization with Senate and "colleges" or boards of adminstrators.
- Divided Russia 8 provinces, then 50, in his attempt to create a police state.
- Created ***Table of Ranks*** where many civil offices ranked in fourteen levels and grades, and one could become noble based on merit.
- Employed Mercantilist policies, to pay for army, relied on taxes oppressing Peasants.
- State control of Russian Orthodox Church with the ***Holy Synod*** which made decisions for the church led by a ***procurator***, a laymen who represented the tsar.
- Peter introduced Western customs, practices, and manners, writing a book on Europen etiquette.
- Peter advocated for the equality of men and women, and let women marry of their own will.
### Russia as a Military Power
- Wanted to get a port in the Baltic to open trade with the West in the Swedish Baltic.
- Peter attacked Sweden with help of Poland and Denmark. But ***King Charles XII*** of Sweden wrecked the Poles and Danes, and defeated Russian ary in ***Battle of Narva***, starting ***The Great Northern War***
- Peter won in ***Battle of Poltava***, finally beating him leading to the ***Peace of Nystadt*** after 12 years. 
    - Peter weakened Sweden, strengthened Russia and got Estonia, Livonia, and Karelia. Peter constructed Saint Petersburg, his window to the West, completing the city as the new Rssian capital..
- His Westernization also lead to Russian distrust of Western civilization, due to his forceful adoption tactics.
## The Great Northern States
### Denmark
- Denmark tried to expand under ***Christian IV*** but failed due to system of elected monarchs.
- Denmark military losses created revolution, where new absolutist constitution gave ***Christian V***, a centralized administration and noble chief officeholders.
### Sweden
- Sweden was poor, Gustavus Adolphus's chief minister ***Axel Oxenstierna*** persuaded the king to adopt new policy where nobles were First Estate creating stable monarchy and strong army.
- After death of Gustavu Adolphus, his daughter ***Christina*** failed as ruler. Riksdag, Sweden's parliament -- the burghers, clergy, and peasants protested.
- Christina left and gave Sweden to ***King Charles X***, who established domestic order and ***King Charles XI*** built absolutist monarchy, retaking control. ***King Charles XII*** invested in Military but was too ambitious.
## The Ottoman Empire
- Ottoman Turks tried to completely conquer Balkans after Constantinople; taking Romanian Wallachia in 1476, but failing to Hungarians in Danube valley, and internal problems.
- ***Sultan Suleiman I the Magnificent*** advanced up the Danube seizing Belgrade and Hungary, but not Vienna, and Spanish destroyed Turkish fleet at Lepanto, but Turks still controlled south Mediterranean.
- Ottomans were another European power, but had bloody politics.
- ***Janissaries*** were Christians converted to Muslim faith turned into troops.
- Internal disputes left behind when Ottomans laid siege to Vienna, but were forced back by Poles, Austrians, Bavarians, and Saxons.
## The Limits of Absolutism
- Monarchs didn't actually control subjects, local instituitions were still major govt. Urban/provincial priveleges limited the monarchy.
- Succesfull rulers used the old system to advantage, like Louis XIV, but aristocracy limited monarchs.
