# Chapter 15.4 - Limited Monarchy and Republics
- Not all European states had absolute monarchy.
## The Weakness of the Polish Monarchy
- Marrige of ***Jagiello***, grand prince of Lithuania, and Polish queen ***Jadwiga*** made a Lithuanian-Polish ginormous Christian state.
    - Ruled much of East Europe + Ukraine, nobles elected and controled king, keeping serfdom.
- After Jagiello, outsiders like Sigismund III became new king, who wanted to include Poland, Russia in Sweden (failed to do so)
- The ***Sejm*** or Polish diet, was a two-chamber assembly where landowners dominated, and who shared power with the king, making sure central authority wouldn't efffect local interests.
    - ***Liberum veto*** allowed Sejm to be stopped by a single dissenting member brought chaos
- Became a battleground for foreign powers, and a confederation of semi-independent states.
## The Golden Age of the Dutch Republic
- The United Provinces were an Atlantic power of the Netherlands, becoming the core of the Dutch state, recognized by the Peace of Westphalia.
- Each province had a ***stadholder*** repsonsible for leading the army and maintaining order.
- William of Orange and the house of Orange dominated the stadholder positions in most of the 7 provinces, favoring centralized government with Orange as monarch.
- ***The States General*** an assembly of representatives from every province, opposed Orangist ambitions, advocating for a decentralized government
    - William III of Orange established a monarchical regime but, after William III's death, the republican forces won again, a persistent struggle.
- Dutch became head of European trade, but wars w/ France and England burdened Dutch finance and manpower as well as English shipping competition.
### Life in 17th Century Amsterdam
- Amsterdam was financial + commercial hub of Europe, with many Spanish Netherlands refugees and an "urban expansion plan" that increased city territories.
    - Tall narrow fronted houses, canals allowed merchants + artisans to use upper stories of houses as storerooms.
- Shallow-draft Dutch merchant ships called ***fluyts*** allowed transportation of large amounts of goods a factor in Amsterdams success.
- ***Dam Square*** was a place where cargos were unloaded. 
- Amsterdam was Chief port for the Dutch West Indian and East Indian trading companies, as well as an importaint city from refining raw materials to finished goods, as well as war goods.
- The ***Exchange Bank of Amsterdam*** and ***Amsterdam Stock Exchange*** led to it's importance as a financial center.
- Calvinist Amsterdam burghers were minimalists, but began to reject Calvinist heritage and adopt more elaborate and colorful clothes.
