# Chapter 15.5 Notes
- Mannerism
    - Basically everything super elongated expressed confusion, yearning for understanding.
    - Imitation of High Renaissance, but really weird.
    - Famous work: ***El Greco*** - Laocoon
- Baroque
    - Whole point was to get people to return to the church
    - Very emotional, tenebrism used, dynamic, trying to show people how bad life is without the Church and how good life is with it.
    - Famous Works: ***Ecstasy of Saint Theresa*** and  Peter Paul Ruben's ***The Landing of Maire de' Medici at Marseilles***
- French Classicism
    - Inspired neoclassicism basically it was taking the ideals of the high renaissance but applying it to the modern times, and using Baroque's grandeur and stuff. Nicolas Poussin was a big guy here.
- Dutch Realism
    - Dutch people focused less on religion and more on capturing the beauty of the every day, this was also kind of part of the Baroque movement but not really (thx Tanaka)
    - ***Rembrandt*** came from here he did self-portraits, the night watch, and more.
- Theater
    - Shakespeare
        - Shakespeare was a God from this time, he served thee peasants in the Globe and the rich in the Blackfriars. (Crowd pleasers neccessary, everyone must love)
        - Acted and stuff to, and was super good at the english language.
    - Spain Golden Century
        - Lope de Vega started Spain's Golden Century of theater, and playhouses were in every town, he wrote plays to please audiences/gain money.
    - French Drama
        - French playrights wrote for elite audience (think Louis XIV) specially evident in Jean-Baptiste Racine (wrote Phedre + Hippolytus)
        - Also people who had Louis's Patronage did well like Jean-Baptiste Moliere who satirized religion and social world.
