# Chapter 16.5-6
### Rationalism
- René Descartes - Wrote ***Discourse on Method***
    - should only accept philosophies based on reason
    - began with assumption that he exists b/c "cogito ergo sum"
    - concluded mind and matter are separate (***Cartesian dualism***)
        - Westerners began to see themselves as just the mind rather than as an entire organism (defied standard religions)
### Scientific Method
- Francis Bacon
    - deductive reasoning = start premise -> another premise -> certain conclusion
    - inductive reasoning = repeated observation -> generalize observations -> probable conclusion
    - ***empiricism*** the more data present, the greater probability of true conclusion.
    - Francis Bacon outlined inductive reasoning in ***Novum Organum***
### Scientific Societies + Science and Society
- English Royal Society and French Academy recognized in 1650s, French govt. encouraged Academy, not English.
- Constructed observatories, and made Scientific Journals like The French *Journal des Savants*
- Royal Society made *Philosophical Transactions* aimed specifically at scientists not everyone smart.
- ***Economic benefits to science spawned importance of science patronage, etc.***
    - Levellers, Diggers, Ranters, etc. focused on new sciences as a radical alternative to traditional teachings.
### Science and Religion
- Science came from a growth of relgion + mysticism (complements, not opponents)
    - Religious person were the initial attackers of science not opposite.
    - Evolved into seperate systems of thought
- Benedict de Spinoza - Ethics Demonstrated in the Geometrical Manner
    - Monism - God is the universe, not merely the universe's creator. We are all a part of God. Nature is not for use, we are part of it.
- Blaise Pascal wrote *Pensées* (Thoughts)
    - Christianity should be independent of reason - people should join because the world of nature could never reveal God.
    - Pascal's Wager - Pascal said that belief in God is sensible, because if you believe and there is no God, nothing bad happens; if you don't bhelieve and there is a God, you are screwed.
        - False dichotomy (black and white falacy), utterly ignores other religions etc. Also belief doesn't cost you is assumed (not true)
