# Chapter 17.1
## Enlightenment Ideas (17.1)
- Scientific Rev. (SR) but applied to society and discovery of natural world. 
    - German philosopher ***Immanuel Kant*** explored enlightenment.
    - Pillars=***Reason, Natural Law, Hope, Progress***
- Translation of SR ideas (like Newton) into wider circles
    - ***Bernard de Fontenelle*** secretary of French Royal Academy published *Plurality of Worlds* presenting complex science in easy to understand story.
- ***skepticism*** towards religion
    - ***Pierre Bayle*** was a Protestant
        - criticized traditional religious superstition, intolerance, and dogmatism
        - *argued for complete religious toleration*
        - applied rationalist principles to the Bible, re-imagining its heroes as villains (David)
- Global Understanding
    - ***James Cook***'s *Travels* (about Tahiti discovery) popularized noble savages
        - idea that indigenous people are closer to nature, ergo superior i.e. natural man
    - ***cultural relativism*** compared other countries to Europe
        - mulltiple/single species = poly/monogenesis
- Influence of Newton + Locke
    - Wanted to create Newton's rules that constructed a "universal law" for planetary motion, and created ***universal laws of politics, economics, justice, religion, and arts***
    - Locke postulated a "tabula rasa" or "blank mind" where we are made of our environment (nurture over nature)
- Philosophes
    - All Enlightenment thinkers were philosophes, French for philosophers
        - French word because ***Paris was the center of the enlightenment***
- Political Philosophes
    - Charles de Secondat, the baron de ***Montesquieu***
        - *Persian Letters*, written as convo between two Persians traveling France.
            - attack traditional relgion, religious toleration, denounces slavery
            - use of reason to free humans from prejudice
            - all of these are the "program" of the Enlightenment
        - ***The Spirit of the Laws*** attempt to apply scientific method to social and political life.
            - Uncover natural, universal laws that govern social life.
            - Three govts. = republics (small state), monarchy (medium), despotism (large state)
            - **ADVOCATED CHECKS AND BALANCES**
    - ***Voltaire***
        - Rlly famous playwright, infamous after *Philosophic Letters on the English*
            - Praised (exaggerated) English freedom of religion, forcing him out of French public life.
        - *Treatise on Toleration* - England + Holland have no problems by allowing religious toleration.
        - Believed in ***deism*** God created universe, no current involvement (watch set in motion)
    - Denis ***Diderot***
        - **attacks on Christianity** which he claimed was fanatical + unreasonable
        - wrote the ***Encylopedia*** or *Classified Dictionary of Sciences, Arts, and Trades*
            - 28 volume work designed to bring society into Enlightenment thinking
- Social Science Philosophes
    - David Hume
        - wrote the *Treatise on Human Nature*, argued for a systematized "science of man"
    - Physiocrats, led by François Quesney - economic rules
        - ***Physiocrats' Economic Laws***
            - land is the only source of wealth (against buillion/mercantilism)
            - ***laissez-faire*** economimcs is best (no govt. interference)
    - ***Adam Smith*** wrote *Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations*
        - gave three principles of economics (attacked Mercantilism)
            - no protective tariffs, buy instead of produce if cheaper
            - wealth of nation comes from ***labor***
            - laissez-faire economics is best, govt. should provide army, police, public works.
- Next Generation Philosophes (criticize old Philosophes)
    - Jean-Jacques ***Rousseau***
        - had leisure of writing, courtesy of his mistress
        - *Discourse on the Origins of Inequality of Mankind*
            - mankind was happy + free in primative state, private property destroyed happiness led to laws + governors (Romanticism basically right?)
        - ***The Social Contract***
            - agreement by entire society to be governed by its general will
            - ***general will automatically what is bet for each individual***
            - requires direct democracy, since the laws must be euqal to general will
        - *Émile* - suggested education should foster children's natural instincts, leading to balance between heart + mind.
    - Mary ***Wollstonecraft*** - *Vindication of the Rights of Women* (first feminism)
        - ***women should not have to obey men*** just as slavery wrong
        - ***women should have equal rights with men*** since they have capacity to reason.
- ***salons***
    - occurred in drawing rooms of wealthy aristocracy (middle class not affected by Enlightenment)
    - hostesses gather philosophes and guests to have conversations - ***gave women political/social power to influence decision-makers*** (Marie Theres de Geoffrin + marquise du Deffand)
        - Rousseau was funded by older female lover, Voltaire lived on mistresses estate.
    - ***ended during French Revolution due to complaints of undue female influence***

