# Chapter 17.2
### Culture and Society in the Enlightenment (17.2)
- *Baroque, which stressed majesty, power, and movement, ***Rococo*** emphasized grace and gentle action.*
- ***Neoclassicism*** was very popular recapturing dignity/simplicity of Classical Greece + Rome
    - ***Jacque Louis. David*** made Oath of Horatii which was popular esp. in French rev.
- Pre-Classical Period Music
    - ****Bach*** made Baroque music for the Church and as a way to worship God.* He composed *Saint Matthew's Passion* and
    - ***George Frederick Handel*** wrote *Fireworks Music* and *Messiah* for large audiences in an unconventional way.
- Classical Period/Era emerged from New Instruments like Piano
    - *Haydn + Mozart shifted musical center of Europe from Italy + Germany to Austrian Empire*
    - Franz Joseph Haydn wrote for public concerts instead of patrons, wrote *The Seasons* and *The Creation* dedicated to the common people.
    - Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart was a prodigy but couldn't get along with patrons. He wrote The Marriage of Figaro, The Magic Flute, and Don Giovanni
- Books of the Enlightenment
    - The growth of the novel came from the romance novel tradition
        - Samuel Richardson wrote Pamela: or, Virtue Rewarded appealed to growing cult of sensibility and taste for emotional and sentimental.
        - Henry Fielding wrote The History of Tom Jones, a Foundling, which had characters akin to English society.
    - Voltaire's *Age of Louis XIV* described totality of poast human experience and "initiated the modern ideal of social history"
    - Edward Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire
        - reflected Enlightenment ideas at the time - blamed Christianity for the fall of Rome; saw Middle Ages as especially gruesome due to Christian control (inaccurate)
        - HISTORY ALWAYS REFLECTS IDEALS OF WHEN IT IS WRITTEN
- High Culture
    - Available to the middle class (lending libraries, newspapers)
    - Move from patronages to public (ex. novel which began to be published by publishing houses)
    - Magazines like Addison + steele's Spectator instructed and entertained the masses.
- Popular Culture
    - festivals - mostly in Southern Catholic Europe
        - Carnival was before Lent (before Easter), food , sex, drinking, song, and agression.
    - Taverns were primary meeting places
    - Chapbooks were like little magazines on cheap paper, had stories, and spiritual stuff and wasx only possible due to rising literacy.

- Cultural changes
    - *Education moved from ephasis on Classics to emphasis on practicality e.g. German Realschule which gave modern languages, geography, etc.* but still focusing on *Greek and Latin Studies*
    - Criminal Justice
        - Torture and Executions declined
        - Cesare Beccaria - *On Crimes and Punishment*, *argued that punishment should equal deterrent and no capital punishment.*
    - *Medicine*
        - Physicians required license after doctorate in medicine.
        - Movement from barber-surgeons to trained surgeons through the formation of guilds which separated themselves from the barbers.
        - Apothecaries, midwives, etc. sold remedies and also diagnosed some stuff and male doctors started replacing midwives. But faith healing was still practiced.
        - Hospitals were REALLY GROSS, and reform failed.
