# Chapter 17.3
### Religion and the Churches
- Religion merely upheld society's structure, everyone was in it, but no real power or change within it.
- Protestant Church State Relations
    - Protestant churches were controlled by the state (Reformation) and this worked well.
- Catholic Church State Relations
    - Catholic Church still had power and wealth in many states and was hierarchically structured.
    - Society of Jesus dissolved in "nationalization" or control of the Catholic Church movement.
    - Decline of papal power **paralleled** decline of Jesuits.
- Toleration of Religious Minorities
    - Philosophes wanted toleration, but rulers believed only one path to salvation and persecution continued.
    - Some progress was made by Joseph II of Austria, and his Toleration Patent of 1781 which recognized Catholicism's public practice, but let non-Christians worship privately, and were now equal.
        - Although he gave Jews some rights, they still couldn't own land or worship in public and were encouraged to learn German and assimilate into Austrian society.
    - Jewish Treatment
        - Jews weren't recognized, everyone hated them, lived mostly in eastern Europe but were restricted. Western Jews got better treatment, but were still resented.
        - Jewish communities were looted and massacred in ***pogroms***
        - Enlightenment thinkers were as critical of Judaism as they were of Christianity
        - some said Jews should have rights because they were human
- Pietism was a German response to the desire for a deeper personal devotion to God
    - spread by Count Nikolaus von Zinzendorf, who directly opposed "rational" Christianity and deism spread by philosophes.
- John ***Wesley***
    - advocated personal religious experiences
    - preached to common people
    - organized people together into ***Methodist*** communities
