# Chapter 18.1
## Enlightened Absolutism/Despotism
- People have natural rights
    - right to choose religion, freedom of speech + press, and right to hold private property
    - rights are protected by an "Enlightened" ruler
    - rights of individual groups cannot be trusted to masses, who tend to oppress minorities
- Enlightened rulers also:
    - foster arts, sciences, and education
    - rule not arbitrary - rule by force of law/subject to law
## France
- Leadership fell to Cardinal Fleury Louis XIV's minister after death, but after he died Louis XV ruled as a supposed Enlightened monarch.
    - in reality his mistress Madame de Pompadour took over and made France's important govt decisions
    - Louis XVI took over after death w/ Marie Antoinette both of whom were boosted and led to French Revolution.
## Great Britain
- From "English"/"Scottish" to "Britains" in the United Kingdom
- Patronage - awarding of titles, posts, and positions in church + government
    - deputies to the House of Commons were chosen by borough (small town)
    - no equality to how many came from each borough
    - ended up w/ "pocket boroughs" where a borough was controlled by a single person
        - ex. Duke of Newcastles controlled representatives of 7 boroughs
- Hanoverian - when the last Stuart ruler died, the crown was offered to the rulers of the German state of Hanover.
    - George I + George II did not speak  English or understand English system.
    - Robert Walpole, the prime minister, handled governmental matters.
    - William Pitt the Elder was a proponent of expansion/trade and was prime minister and acquired Canada + India in the 7 Years' War.
        - was dismissed and replaced w/ Lord Brute by George II
    - King George III avoided criticism by appointing William Pitt the Younger, George III was kinda crazy but managed to get by.
## Dutch Republic Decline
- Struggle between oligarchs (or regents) + house of Orange stadholders.
    - Regents divided by Dutch burghers (Patriots) began to want democracy, opening up courts to non-oligarchs.
    - Patriots succeeded so Prussian king sent troops in to crush Patriots and old system restablished.
## Prussia
- Frederick William I
    - Established the General Directory, which supervised all government affairs
        - increased differences between socio-economic classes
        - Set up the Junkers, landed aristocracy who owned large estates w/ lots of serfs
            - The Junkers controlled the army and the peasants
            - Frederick controlled the Junkers
        - Peasants had no control over their lives (had to get noble's permission to marry)
        - Only way middle class gained prestige was through civil service
    - Frederick the Great = Frederick II
        - diligent ruler known for efficiency and honesty
        - followed philosphes' recommendations (except for abolishing serfdom - he increased class-based splitting) - Enlightened Monarch
        - enlarged army and used it in War of Austrian Succession and the Seven Years' War (not very enlightened)
## Austria
- Maria Theresa
    - Reworked the system of adminsitration throughout the AUstrian Empire (took power away from diets)
    - Catholic: not open to Philosophes' suggestions for reformation 
- Joseph II
    - son of Maria Theresa
    - continued expanding Habsburg power in Austria
    - Enlightened monarch
        - Reforms
            - Abolished serfdom
            - Gave peasants hereditary rights to their holdigns (semi-successful)
            - Eliminated international trade barriers
            - Abolished death penalty
            - Complete religious toleration
        - Reforms alienated nobility + Catholic Church + even commoners
            - ex. tried making German official nat. language: alienated non-German speakers + nobles + peasants.
        - Successors undid most of his reforms
            - Epitaph read: "Here lies Joseph II, unfortunate in everything he undertook" (SAME)
## Russia
- Chatherine II the Great
    - German wife of Tsar Peter III, who was assasinated by nobles
    - said she wanted to be Enlightened, but worked w/ nobility to strengthen their position relative to peasants
    - led to very poor conditions for peasants, revolts in bortder districts
    - Cossacks: independent tribes in southern Russia - instrumental in the rebellion
        - led by Emalyan Pugachev (Pugachev's rebellion)
        - Focused on Volga River valley, north of the Caspian Sea
        - Peasants seized landlords' estates, killing over 1,500 estate owners + their families
        - government rallied, Pugachev captured + killed
        - conditions for peasants made even poorer - end all reforms in rural areas expand serfdom
    - Catherine expanded Russian territory
        - West into Poland (acquired 50%)
        - South to Black Sea (required fighting Turks)
## Bye, Bye, Poland
- Elected Polish king lost rights which were given to Polish nobles
- Invasions resulted in Austria, Russia, and Prussia dividing Poland into three parts.
- After hopeless rebellion under General Thaddeus Kosciuzko, the remaining Polish state was obliterated by Austria, Prussia, and Russia in the third partition of Poland.
## Rest of Europe
- Spain
    - Now w/ a Bourbon King (Wars of the Spanish Succession)
    - Lost lands in Italy + Netherlands in Treaty of Utrecht (Spanish Suc. again) so now it had money to get by.
    - Charles III reduced power of Inquisition and banished the Jesuits.
- Italy
    - Austria took over in Italy, Habsburg got everything except Sicily given to nothern Italian state of Savoy.
    - Bourbons restablished control over Naples and Sicily, independent states grew impotent.
- Portugal
    - The marquis of Pombal (chief ministers) - ruled through several monarchs
        - Reduced power of nobles + church
        - Once he died, things went right back to the way they were
- Scandanavia - Gustavus III - Enlightened Monarch of Sweden
    - Established freedom of religion, speech, press
    - no more torture
    - laissez-faire economics
    - assasinated by nobles, but they couldn't undo his reforms
- Denmark had enlightened King Christian VII w/ Chief Minister John Frederick Struensee but Aristocratic Opposition screwed things up and Struensee died.
## Examining 3 Big "Enlightened Monarchs"
- Joseph II (Austria) - truly was Enlightened
- Frederick II (Prussia) - was, but he loved war + class divisions too much
- Catherine (Russia) - started out, but favored nobles too much
