# Chapter 18.4 
- Socio/economic standing determined by hereditary orders or estates w/ a strict class system.
- Peasants
    - As usual 85%, diff between free peasant (Britain, North Italy Low Countries Spain, Western Germany) but were poor AF (worse than serfdom)
    - Tenant farmers owed tithes, or 1/3 of crops, which ended up w/ aristocrats
    - Serfs still dominated, w/o rights, Russia especially was basically slavery, landlords had jurisdiction.
    - Peasants ate bread, water, wine, beer, soup, vegetables, potatoes. harvests bad -> disease + dead
- Nobility
    - Possessed complete control, and had unfair rights, dominated society (2-3%)
    - Were kind of eccentric, and had unique lifestyles (meat, fish, cheese, nuts, sweets) mined resources of estates, and followed mercantile procedure.
    - Adminstrated the state, controlled government, and served as military officers.
    - Large gap in wealth within nobels, poor nobles sank into unpriveleged
    - Rich people could join the nobles despite efforts to stop.
    - The Country House
        - Other monarchs tried to built courts like Versailles, but most remained on estates especially in England's court of Hanover.
        - Greogorian style estates common (Classical serenity of Venitian Andrea Palladio)
        - Desire for privacy = separation between floors, servants at a distance, downstairs = entertaining
    - The Grand Tour
        - Sons of aristocrats made a tour of Europe's major cities (final education)
        - Enligish spent a ton during travels, French saved money.
        - Tutors forced them to go to museums but they still were bad.
            - Florence = Uffizi Gallery, Venice = prostitutes, Rome = Pilgrimage/St. Peter's
- Rural Areas
    - Minority of the population, majority of the population lived in city/large towns
    - Didn't have education, culture, materials, of cities
    - peasants hated prosperity of towns which leached off of countryside (acquiring tithes, rents, dues)
- Cities
    - patrician (noble) oligarchies that controlled the communities by dominating town councils
    - Patricians -> middle classes (office holders, financiers, bankers, merchants, wealthy rentiers) -> petty bourgeoisie (master artisans, shopkeepers, small traders) - > working class.
    - Guilds carried on, apprentices became journeymmen before becoming masters but became oligarchies. Skilled artisans forced into low wage jobs.
    - High death rates due to sanitation
- Poverty
    - Everywhere in both city + country side, prostitution alternative to begging
    - People didn't give to beggars anymore (current state of things)
    - Order of Saint Vincent de Paul + Sisters of Charity helped the poor but were overwhelmed
    - Enlightened officials argued that the state should become involved in the problem, mixed feelings prevented action.
    - Vagrants + beggars rounded up and incarcerated as deterrant, problem was socioeconomic so this did nothing. Public work projects weren't enough to provide work and no money available.
