# Chapter 19.1
- Britain controlled colonies after 7 Years War, but conflict between Americans and British grew. British wanted Parliament as a lead but Americans believed that only representative assemblies should interfere with internal affairs + no tax without representation.
- TJ's Declaration of Independence affirmed Enlightenment's natural rights and declared the colonies independent of the British crown.
- The War for Independence
    - The Second Continental Congress authroized the Continental Army formed under George Washington, but his army was weak compared to others.
    - Loyalists (15-30%) were still Loyal to Britain kind of, and rejected the rebellion, they were mostly in New York + Pennsylvania
    - Patriots won over many of the uncommited by persuasion/force, Patriots were generally poor but some were rich like Washington, yielding a broad spectrum of Patriots and greater voting rights for all.
    - French supported the Americans from the start
    - Cornwallis surrendered in the Batle of Yorktown 1781, and the Treaty of Paris recognized independence in 1783.
- Forming a New Nation
    - Articles of Confederation didn't form a good national government, so convention held in Philadelphia to reform.
    - Central government created distinct from state govt w/ trade and currency powers, and branches created.
    - US Constitution approved by slim margin, and Congress passed Bill of Rights (12 amendmentss) derived from natural rights philosophy.
- Impact of Revolution on Europe
    - Proved the liberal ideas of the enlightenment.
    - marquis de Lafayette returned to France full of ideas from America, becoming a member of the "Society of Thirty" who were "lovers of liberty" and were influential in the French Revolution.
    - Model of revolution to the rest of the world (inaugarated the modern political world)
