## Chapter 22.1
- Napoleon III (1 of new conservative leaders) showed govt. can use liberal+nationalistic force for power.
### Louis Napoleon: Toward the Second Empire
- Dismissed as "Napoleon the Small" but was clever and desired personal power, after his election.
- Won ppl's vote 3 times in row, National Assembly rejected reelection, military coup seized control of govt. restoring male suffrage, elected him pres for ten years, then emperor with massive vote.
### The Second Napoleonic Empire
- Super authoritarian, napoleon II controlled everything, elected Legislative Corps had no power
#### Early Domestic Policies
- Super good first 5 years by investing in infrastructure, industrial expansion, welfare, medicare
- Under Baron Haussmann Paris was reconstructed w/ broad streets for military purposes (barricades, rapid movement)
#### Liberalization of the Regime
- In the 1860s, Legalized trade unions, gave Legislative Corps more power, but led to policy failure
### Foreign Policy: The Mexican Adventure
- French, Spanish, British troops in Mexico during struggle, but French remained after struggle under Archduke Maximilian of Austria, who surrendered to Mexicans and died when army called away.
### Foreign Policy: The Crimean War
- Crimean War super rewarding b/c of freeing France from restrictions of peace settlements.
#### Foreign Policy: The Crimean War
- Ottomans controlled southeastern Europe, but lost a lot to Austria + Russia
- Ottomans declining by 19th cent. (greek + serbian independence) Russian Moldavia + Wallachia
- Russia's closeness made ppl against, Austria want Balkan, Fran + Brits intd in Medit. trade + naval bases.
#### War in the Crimea
- Russia v. Ottoman war b/c (Russia want Palestinian Christian shrines protected), Brit + France war on russia next year.
- B+F war b/c balance of pow + Napoleon insulted by Russia. Austria remained neutral. Russia alone.
- At Battle of Balaklava B+F attacked Crimean peninsula in Black Sea, Russian Sevastopol fortress fell.
- After Nicholas I died, Alexander II sued for peace and by Treat of Paris (1856) + Moldavia + Wallachia placed under protection of all 5 powers, Russia lost a ton of land + Black Sea neutrality
- Crimean War super costly 60% died from disease, but British Florence Nightingale kept good sanitary conditions and saved many ppl and established nursing as a profession.
- Crimean War broke Concert of Europe, Russia humiliated/weakened by Austria, Austria w/o support, Britain pulled back from Continental stuffs, leading to new borders being formed, some leaders followed "politics of reality"
