## Chapter 22.2 - National Unification: Italy and Germany
### The Unification of Italy
- Austria dominant in Italy, but unification of the Royal House of Savoy in Piedmont made an effort for national unity uner the new king Victor Emmanuel II who named Camillo di Cavour as his prime minister.
#### The Leadership of Cavour
- Cavour was a moderate who invested in infrastructure/industrialization allowing him to build army
- Made agreement with Napoleon III to kick Austrians out of Italy, France recieved Nice and Savoy in Central Italy for Prince Napoleon (Napoleon III's cousin) marrying Victor Emmanuel's daughter
- French won battles in Magenta + Solferino and made peace with Austria without telling French b/c Prussians were joining Austria, Piedmont got Lombardy, Venetia owned by Austria
- Nationalists in north italy separated from Austrian control and joined Piedmont
#### The Efforts of Garibaldi
- Garibaldi supported Mazzini + Young Italy, raised army of Red Shirts, landed in Scicily revolt.
- Garibaldi tried to go North and controlled Scicily + Naples, but Cavour intervened and took over 
Papal states, and Garibaldi (favored dem. rep. Cavour didn't) retired to avoid civil war and Cavour died.
- Basically had unification under Victor Emanuel except for French Rome, Austrian Venetia but in the Austro-Prussian War Prussia's victory gave Italy, it's ally Venetia and Franco-Prussian war gave them Rome (new capital of Italy)
### The Unification of Germany
- Prussia created Zollverein, a German customs union, which eliminated tolls and brought prosperity
- Prussia made constitution w/ bicameral legislature, but divided voting population based on wealth (middle class took over)
- Frederick William IV died and William I who expanded the army and three years mandatory service.
- Prussian liberals opposed mandatory military service and William I appointed conservative Otto von Bismarck as prime minister.
#### Bismarck
- Started as Junker/aristocracy, became Prussian ambassador to Russia then France (learned rulers)
- Bismarck was ultimate realist + practictioner of Realpolitik
- Resubmitted army bill but got rejected again, and he organized the army anyway.
#### Danish War (over duchies of Shleswig + Holstein)
- Bismarck persuaded Austrians to join Prussia in war against Danes who quickly surrendered.
#### Austro-Prussian War
- Bismarck teamed with Italy to beat Austria in exchange for Venetia, and his military reforms payed off. Austria Defeated at Koniggratz, but lost zero terriotory.
- Bismarck legalized his secret war tax, proving nationalism + authoritarianism good, liberalism bad
- Germanic Confederation kept local govt. but King of PRussia was head, and army + foreign policy controlled by king + chancellor. Parliament consisted of Bundesrat (federal council) + Reichstag (elected)`
#### Franco-Prussian War
- Bismarck realized France not happy at their success and needed a win
- Spain was about to go Hohenzollern surrounding France, Bismarck edited French objection letter to start war.
- Prussia captured entire French Army + Napoleon III and peace treaty made Francy pay indemnity and give up Alsace + Lorraine
- Southern Germany merged into Northern Germany and William I was declared kaiser -> new bofp
