## Chapter 22.3 - Nation Building and Reform: The National State in Midcentury
### Austrian Empire
- After revolutions, socioeconomic change through urban proletariat, labor unrest, middle class
- Alex von Bach led creation of centralized national govt., but after Italian War, Francis Joseph
s proposed parliament, the Reichsrat, alienated Hungarians (always German majority).
#### The Ausleich of 1867 (b/c of military disasster in the austro-prussian war)
- The Compromise of 1867 created a Dual Monarchy of Austria-Hungary w/ Vienna vs. Buda(pest) but didn't satisfy other nationalities
### Imperial Russia
- Russia was super bad but Tsar Alexander II tried to overhaul the Russian system
- Serfdom made ppl avoid industrialization, and they couldn't deal with advanced weaponry, leading to peasant revolts.
#### Abolition of Serfdom
- Govt. bought shitty land for the peasants to free them and gave them basic rights
- Peasants were indentured to the state via the mir, or village commune, which forced peasants to work land in old ways unhappilly
#### Other Reforms
- Zemstvos, or local assemblies, provided self govt, but nobles had advantage and beauracrats stopped them
- Legal reforms of 1864 which created regular system of local + proviincal courts + judical code was succesful
- Reformers like Radical Alexander Herzen said peasant should be chief instrument for reform, populism aimed to create new through revolutionary peasants, but some likje Vera Zasulich became violent in their repression of tsarist regime.
- People's Will (radical violent group) assasinated Alexander II, his son (III) turned against reform
### Great Britain: The Victorian Age
- Britain's Reform Act and liberal parlimentary system kept themselves stable and prosperous
- Britain grew economically, and Queen Victoria reigned from a long time (sense of duty + responsib)
- Henry John Temple, Lord Palmerston like many had no party loyalty and made compromises
#### Disraeli and the Reform Act of 1867
- Tories (Conservatives) led by Disraeli made another Reform Act of 1867, democratizing Britain, actually leading to Liberal victory.
- Act's expansion of voting rights forced Liberal + Conservatives to organize to win electorate and rivalry developed.
#### The Liberal Policies of Gladstone
- William Gladstone opposed Disraeli and made many reforms: secret ballot, abolished military comission, Education Act of 1870
### The United States: Slavery and War
- Cotton industry powered by slave labor esp. in the south but abolitionist North created Civil War
- Andrew Jackson's Kansas-Nebraska Act made slavery determined by pop. vote and Rep. party who opposed slaves.
- Licoln of Republican party was elected pres. alientaed the south leading to two nations
#### The Civil War
- Radicalized public opinion in the North, wore down Confederate, Licoln Emancipation Proclamation freed slaves, Ulysses S. Grant got Robert E. Lee to surrender.
## The Emergence of a Canadian Nation
- Treaty of Paris created Canada (New France), upper Canada mainly English, lower French Canadian + migration from Britain to Canada fueled self-govt.
- After Civil War, rebels in Lower Canada got separation from Britain and ruled itself but foreign affairs under control of British still.
