## Chapter 22.4 Industrialization and the Marxist Response
### Industrialization on the Continent
- - Railroads and stuff grew a ton, so did continental iron stuff, but Britain made half the world's pig iron
- Once all tolls/tarrifs removed helped industrialization
- Govt. encouraged joint-stock investment banks, which helped promote railways.
- Unions represented small part of working class, socialist parties helped fight for working conditions.
### Marx and Marxism
- Marx wrote the Communist Manifesto, inspired by German philosopher Friedrich Hegel where he wrote a newspaper that got shut down b/c of radicalness.
- Friedrich Engels sponsored him (was super rich) and he knew wage slavery which he wrote in The Conditions of the Working Class in England.
- Marx and Engels published the Manifesto for his friends in the Communist League and it didn't really do much.
- Marx's ideas were a synthesis of French + German thought from Hegel specifically, Marx disagreed that economic over opposing forces determined the course of history.
#### Ideas of the Communist Manifesto
- History is built upon class struggle, govt. + state reflects/defend interest of industrial middle class
- Proletariat = working class should overthrough the burgeouisie and create a classless society
- Marx spent rest of life writing Das Kapital (Capital) which were edited by Engels after death
#### Organizing the Working Class
- Marx participated in the International Working Men's Association, as he thought the working classwas the key to everything (kinda populism), which collapsed and left the fate of socialism in the hands of other parties.
