## Chapter 23.3 - The National State
- In Western European states, mass politics evovled but was resisted in old parts of Europe
### Western Europe: The Growth of Political Democracy
- Britain and France saw expansion of right to vote, but less succesfull in Spain and Italy
#### Reform in Britain
- Britain had two-party parliamentary system, w/ many voters due to Gladstone's Reform Act of 1867
- Further expansion via Reform Act of 1884 (all men who paid taxes)
- Women still denied voting rights as Redistribution Act eliminated boroughs and made equal constituencies.
- House of Commons got payed which democratized even more
#### Ireland
- Gradual reform failed in Ireland, though Irish + English Parliament linked via Act of Union in 1801
- Irish became nationalistic, and Gladstone avveliated this w/ limited land reform but failed
- Charles Parnell called for "home rule" (separate parliament, not independent) and peasants were terroristic/demanding indpendence.
- Gladstone introduced a home rule bill in 1886, but was voted doown by Conservative members of Parliament, Gladstone tried gain as prime minister in 1893 but failed.
#### Third Republic in France
- Louis Napoleon's downfall after defeat by Prussians, Bismarck forced French to make a govt. by universal male suffrage
- The French ppl favored the monarchists, so republicans made radical govt. called Commune
- National Assembly tried to crush Commune, and working class men + ***women*** helped (Louise Michel one leader)
- They all failed when govt. troops massacred thousands, ans shipped them to the French penal colony of New Caledonia
- Harsh punishment of revolutionary women, stopped further working-class women revolt
- A constiution ended up being established anyway b/c monarchists couldn't agree on a king
    - bicameral legistlature, upper house, Senate, Chamber of Deputies, a president
- The Constiution of 1875 solidified the Third Republic (lasted 65 years), elections in 1876 + 77 strengthened republicans and established chamber of deputies who prime minsiter was responsible to.
- Remained precarious due too opposition by monarchists, clergy, and army officers
- General Georges Boulanger was expected to coup'd'etat but he ran away like a baby so republicans stayed strong.
#### Spain
- Under King Alfonso XII, a parliamentary group of Conservatives + Liberals form (both followed same policies, alternated office)
- After Spanish defeat in Spanish-American War in 1898, the Generation of 1898 called for reform
- Liberals + Conservatives attempted reform, but unrest + industrialization attracted socialism, anarchism and the military silience rebels (reform failed cuz Church + army were tied to conservativism
#### Italy
- Italians remained divided after unification, rich north/poor south worsened things
- Very few could actually vote, and there was a ton of govt. corruption
### Central and Eastern Europe: Persistence of the Old Order
#### Germany
- Despite German Uhnificiation, divisions evident in German constitution
- Bundesrat (upper houe) represented 25 states, individual states had their own kings, armies
- Lower house: Reichstag (elected universal male suffrage) but had no real power before World War I
- German army wanted to escape Reichstag control and operated under Junker landowners responsible only to the emperor.
- Bismarck prevented democratic growth w/ centralization + attacks on Church (Kulturkampf) but changed his mind later.
- Bismarck persecuted the socialists after 12 of them went into Reichstag
- Bismarck enacted social welfare (progressive) to combat socialism but these failed as William II took over as chancellor.
#### Austria-Hungary
- After dual monarchy, Austria established parliamentary system but Francis Joseph ignored it and appoitned his own ministers.
- Problems w/ minorities when PM Edward von Taafe ignored minorities, but concessions to minorities resulted in beauracracy getting piissed.
- Taffe failed but didn't solve the nationalities problem.
- Francis Joseph held the country together via Caatholicism + imperial beauracracy
- Hungary had working parliament but controlled by Magyar land owners who forced their culture everywhere w/ "Magyarization"
#### Russia
- Alexander III expanded tsars power + secret police w/ zero concession to democracy (zemstovs stopped)
- Alexander Russified by banning all languages but Russian (Russians only 40%) angering nationalists- Nicholas II adopted his father's absolutism, but b/c of industrialization his approach wasn't good
