## Chapter 24.2 - Politics: New Directions and New Uncertainties
- Mass politics causing problems political democracy halted b/c of (right wing, liberals, womens right, workers rights, etc.)
### The Movement for Women's Rights
- Women got frustrarted b/c of difficulty of divorce and husbands control over wives
- Reform movements met limited success esp. in Spain and Italy
#### New Professions
- Women gained access to education and then jobs, first teaching, then nursing (Amalie Sieveking's Female Association for the Care of the Poor and Sick), Florence Nightinggale, and Clara Barton.
#### The Right to Vote
- Millicent Fawcett (moderate) believed women should demonstrate poltical power responsibily for suffrage.
- Emmeline Pankhurst  founded the Women's Social and Poltical Union which used publicity stunts to get suffrage.
- Emily Davinson threw herself in front of the king's horse for women's suffrage
- Only in Finland, Norway, and some US states did they earn suffrage b4 WW1
#### Efforts for Peace
- Bertha von Suttner became head of AUstrian Peace Society in nobel winning novel Lay Down Your Arms
- Lower classes joined in this cause as well.
#### The New Woman
- Bertha good example of new woman: escaping roles of motherhood and finding new freedom
- Maria Montessori attended medical school (first woman medical degree Italy), lecture tour "New Woman", taught disabled kids, made Montessori schools.
### Jews in the European Nation-State
- Jews considered murderers of Jesus, separated from Christians in ghettos in earlier times
- In 19th century they got legal equality (emancipated) and assimilated (Benjamin Disraeli was a Jew)
#### Anti-Semitism in the Austrian Empire and Germany
- Christian Socialists were antisemetic + led by Karl Lueger (Vienna Mayor), Hitler found view here
- Germany had Adolf Stocker's ChristianSocial Workers (antisemtic), Jews racially stained
#### Persecution of Jews in Eastern Europe
- Russian Jews were admitted to schools via quota, pogroms (massacres) were regular, some moved to US/Canada, but others to Palestine (Zionism)
#### The Zionist Movement
- Emancipation of Jews proved problematic so Zionists like Theodor Herzl published "The Jewish State" = Palestine, but Ottomans against it.
- First Zionest Congress in 1897 let ppl migrate but during eve of World War I, Zionists hadn't won.
### THe Transformation of Liberalism: Great Britain and Italy
- Govts. undermined tenets of liberalism b/c of problems w/ mass politics
#### Great Britain
- Trade unions favored radical change and incited revolution + unionism
- Fabian Socialists wanted workers to capture House of Commons
- Fabian Socialists + Trade Unions = Labour Party (one seat in 1900, 29 seats in 1906)
- Liberal David Lloyd George made reforms to gain support of workers
    - National Insurance Act of 1911 = benefits for sickness + unemployment (payed for by rich tax)
    - House of Lords against this -> liberals restricted House of Lords ability to veto.
- Irish problem solved via home rule but Irish Protestants against Irish state, British suspended home rule for WW1.
#### Italy
- Giovanni Giolitti used transformism (old into new via bribary). 
- Conquered Libya and made welfare + male suffrage to avoid worker's protest
### France: Travails of the Third Republic
- Alfred Dreyfus (a Jew) convicted of selling military secrets, he was innocent, but wasn't pardoned till 1899
- This convinced Herzl that assimilation didn't protect Jews from anti-Semtisism -> Zionism
- Moderate republicans replaced by radical republicans, church and state separated, etc.
- France was behind Britain, Germany, US in industrial activity and working class hated life, ppl striked a ton, and government repressed it in 1911.
### Growing Tensions in Germany
- Authoritarian during reign of Emperor William II (strongest military/industrial power)
- Social Democrats were a huge party despite attempts at welfare legislation
- Conservative forces blocked by nobility + industry via support for Expansionism
- Pan-German league stressed nationalism + imperialism in response to modernization (anti-Semitic)
### Austria-Hungary: The Problem of the Nationalities
- Male suffrage led to PMs ignoring the more diverse Parliament that got in the way
- German nationalism formed (Social Democrats (supported govt.) Christian Socialists (anti-Semitic)
- Magyars wanted separation from Austria but Emperor Francis Joseph imposed male suffrage in Hungary challenging Magyar domination
- Count István Tisza helped maintain Dual Monarchy, as Magyar ruling was dependent on this monarchy
### Industrialization and Revolution in Imperial Russia
- Minister of Finance Sergei Witte industrialized Russia w/ railroads, protective tariffs, and foreign capital.
- Marxist Social Democratic Party developed, but govt. made these illegal resulting in terrorism
#### The Revolution of 1905
- Political upheaval after Russian fleat rekt by Japanese navy at Tsushima
- Workers went to Winter Palace in St. Petersburg, troops fired launching a revolution "Bloody Sunday"
- Nicholas II issued the October Manifesto where he granted liberties to create a Duma (legislative assembly)
#### Failure of the Revolution
- Under Peter Stolypin reforms gave peasants ownership rights, but Nicholas II curtailed the Duma after Stolypin's murder.
### The Rise of the United States
- Carnegie Steel was unparalleled, cities grew larger, urbanization increased
- Richest americans had all the wealth, American Federation of Labor tried and failed to organize
- Progressive movement of reforms expanded nationally (Meat Inspection Act, Pure Food and Drug Act
- Wilson enacted income tax and a Federal Reserve System (extending function of the state)
### The Growth of Canada
- Canada had four provinces and had unity problems b/c of national differences
- Wilfred Laurier (first French Canadian prime minister) reconciled the two groups and industrilaization boomed.
- Immigrants went to Canada, and expanded westward.
