## Chapter 24.3 - The New Imperialism
- Europeans scrambled for overseas territory in Asia + Africa = new imperialism
### Causes of the New Imperialism
- Nationalism + competition spurred it, colonies provided ports + coaling stations for navies
- People were frenzied patirotically to frame imperialism as a patriotic adventure
#### The Role of Social Darwinism and Racism
- Racists thought they needed to crush the weak and Imperialism was a way to do this.
#### Religious Motives
- White men had the responsibility to civilize the ignorant, and convert their faiths (racism)
#### The Economic Motive
- Demand for rubber, oil, tin -> economic imperialism (European finance dominated)
    - Buisnesses invested where profitable, not for national interest.
- Marxian's like Russian V. I. Lenin in Imperialism, the Highest Stage of World Capitalism (the title)
### The Scramble for Africa
- European takeover in Africa rather than simple trading before using European military + industry.
#### South Africa
- British settled in Cape Town (founded by Dutch), Dutch Boers/Afrikaners migrated to Orange Free State + Transvaal on Great Trek
- Britain took over Transvaal and made it independent South African Republic, while both groups massacred Zulu + Xhosa ppl.
- Cecil Rhodes was a champion of British expansion, founded gold + diamond companies, in a territory known as Rhodesia.
    - Kicked out of PM of Cape Colony after overthrowing Boer govt. w/o British approval
#### The Boer War
- Boers used guerilla tactics, but Boers were defeated in the end, arousing antiwar sentiment.
- British were nice to Boers and created Union of South Africa (self-governining dominion in Britain)
#### Portuguese and French Possessions
- French + Portuguese had settlements before the scramble, during scramble they had a lot of land (Tunasia + French West Africa + Algeria)
#### Other British Possessions
- Britain had some land in Egypt + South Sudan
- Italy seized Ottoman Tripoli = Libya
#### Belgium and Central Africa
- King Leopold II of Belgium colonized Central Africa brutally w/ International Association for the Exploration and Civilization of Central Africa and got help from Henry Stanley to establish settlment in Congo. French moved territory north of the Congo.
#### German Possessions
- Bismarck colonized for the politics in SW Africa (Cameroons, Togoland, Tanganyika)
#### Impact on Africa
- Only Liberia, founded by American slaves, and Ethiopia were free.
- Sudanese tribesmen defended themselves in Battle of Omdurman where Sudanese were massacred.
### Imperialism in Asia
- Until now, British and Russians had some territory in the East, but not much
#### The British in Asia
- Captain James Cook explored Australia, New Zeland was declared commonwealth as well
- Indians became subjects of Queen Victoria, after British East India Company's power transferred
#### Russians in Asia
- Russians went through Siberia to Pacific Coast + Alaska which they sold to US, mainly settling in Siberia.
- Russians also went South to Ottoman lands and into Central Asia, Afghanistan made buffer state between Russian Turkestan + British India, dividing Persia into two spheres of influence.
- Russian occupation of Manchuria + move into Korea led to loss of Russo-Japanese War
#### China
- Ruling Manchu dynasty was declining, British obtained Hong Kong + trading rights, and other Westerners followed (splitting up China a bunch)
#### Japan and Korea
- Japan avoided China's fate, except when Commodore Matthew Perry forced Japanese to give US trading rights.
- Korea was annexed by Japan, after Korea lost a bunch of wars.
#### Southeast Asia
- Britain controlled Burma + Malay States, France subjugated Indochina w/ Saigon, Siam remained free as a buffer state.
#### American Imperialism
- Samoan Islands an important American colony, then Hawaiian Islands, Hawaii annexed by US, and US acquired Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Phillipines.
- Filiponos wanted independence by William McKinley denied it
### Respones to Imperialism
- Most places accepted new governance, traditionalists maintained culture, modernizers adopted
#### Africa
- New class of Africans knew of the west, and were modernizers but resented the foreigners, prosperity didn't extend to colonies.
- Middle class Africans got low jobs, and were segregated, and disrespected
- New intellectuals hated colonial rule but admitted superiority of aspects of Western culture
- In 20th Century, educated natives began to organize poltical parties and movements
#### China
- Boxer Rebellion (Boxers = Society of Harmonious Fists = push foreigners out) w/ murders of foreign missionaries.
- Allied army responded swiftly and demanded more concessions, and Sun Yat-sen (nationalist/socialist) overthrew Manchu dynasty and remained weak.
#### Japan
- Shogun's concessions led to samurai revolt and a Japanese emperer (Mutushito) being established.
- In the Meji Restoration, Mutushito modernized Japan via Western methods/copying
- Japan developed powerful military w/ 240,000 peacetime army, defeating China and annexing some of their territory.
#### India
- British introduced Western culture schools, and banned sati, female infanticide
- Indians were very poor, very few upper class Indians had money
- Indian nationalist movement rose b/c of racial tension, and the Indian National Congress demanded complete independence.
### Results of New Imperialism
- Most African/Asian states were under full colonial rule or collapsing, or a buffer state (Thailand)
- Competition for land abroad hightened rivalries among European states
