## Chapter 24.4
- Wars were avoided due to Bismarck's restraining influence on great powers.
### The Bismarckian System
- After upsetting BofP, to avoid France's wrath Bismarck allied w/ Austria-Hungary + Russia but it failed b/c of Ausstro Russian rivalry in Balkans.
#### The Balkans: Decline of Ottoman Power
- For Russia was a good overland route to Constantinople and Mediteerranean, for Austria = fertile land.
- Serbia + Montenegro lost to Ottoman Empire, but Russia attacked Ottomans, and Russia got a large Bulgarian state by the Treaty of San Stefano in 1878.
- The Congress of Berlin (led by Bismarck) demolished the treaty, and much of the territory was returned to Ottoman control.
- Srbia, Montenegro, Romania = Ottoman Control, Bosnia + Herzegovina = under Austrian protection
#### New Alliances
- Russians terminated Three Emperors League in 1879, Bismarck replaced w/ Austro German Italian Triple Alliance of 1882.
- Bismarck prevented war w/ Russia via Reinsurance Treaty (prevented Franco Russian Alliance)
### New Directions and New Crises
- William II had activist foreign policy (dropped Reinsurance Treaty) leading to Franco RUssian alliance.
- British + France + Russia (Tripple Entente) against Tripple Alliance (Germany, Austria-Hungary, Italy)
#### Crises in the Balkans 1908 - 1913
- Austria annexed Bosnia + Herzegovnia, Serbians pissed and Russians helped them and declared war against Austria but Germany stopped them.
- Serbia, Bulgaria, Montenegro, Greece = Balkan League + defeated Ottomans in First Balkan War
- In Second Balkan War, Greece, Serbia, Romania, and Ottomans, defeated Buulgaria so Macedonia was divided between Serbia + Greece.
- Serbia wanted Albanian territory, but Austrians blocked this, and Serbian nationalists condemned AUstrians.
- Russians were also mad at this confrontation, and wouldn't back down from another war.
- Basically everything was insanely tense and ready for war to begin
