## 25.1 - The Road to World War I
- Murder of Austrian Francis Ferdinand in Sarajevo led to war but other causes.
### Nationalism
- Nation states led to competition + rivalries expanded b/c of expansion led to allaince between Germany, Austria, Italy vs. France Britain, Prussia
- Avoiding war was humilitaitng for countries, so alliances must be helped and maintaned.
- Each nation sovereign, no authority, ppl thought war would help achieve goals
    - Germany want Russia + France + Belgium, France want Alsace-Lorraine, Austria want Serbia, Britain want preserve, Russia want Balkans protected.
### Internal Dissent
- Nationalism bad in groups within countries (Poles in Russia, Irish in Britain, Slavic in Austria)
- Socialist parties on verge of revolution, so supressing internal problems by getting a scapegoat was good.
### Militarism
- Conscription regular outside US + BRitain, military machines doubled, Russia > French + German > British + Italian + Austrian.
- Leaders were very inflexibile in military strategy, forcing leaders into war
### The Outbreak of War: The Summer of 1914
#### Another Crisis in the Balkans
- Russia + Serbia wanted independent Slavic State, but Austria against leading to conflict
#### Assasination of Francis Ferdinand: A "Blank Check"?
- After assasination of Ferdinand by Black Hand, Austria looked to Germany (William II) for support
- Germany responded w/ a blank check for full support
- Franz Conrad von Hotzendorf (Austro-Hungarian Chief) threatened Serbia w/ war after French visist to Austria (technically via extreme demands)
#### Declarations of War
- After declaration of war on July 28, Russia mobilized army against Austria + Germany (b/c dumb general said partial mobilization would be chaos?)
- Germans required Russia to stop mobilization in 12 hours or war, war happened
- General Alfred von Schlieffen had a plan for two front war w/ France + Russia
- Schlieffen Plan had small amount of troops in Russia, while focus on France first, and then go back to Russia
- War declared on France on August 3 after ultimatum to Belgium to allow Germans to pass through
- Britain declared War on August 4 b/c of Belgian neutrality violation, but actually because they didn't want Germany + AUstria to win the war.
