## The War
### 1914-1915: Illusions and Stalemate
- Enthusiasm for war in 1914, nationalism overrided socialism, and ppl filled armies
- Illusion of short war from past wars and belief nation's economy destroyed after short time at war
- War considered an adventure/redemption -> national rebirth 
#### War in the West
- German flank near France wasn't big enough b/c they moved soldiers to other flank to prevent Russian invasian (Schiffilen plan)
- August 4, Germans went through Belgium killed everyone who opposed
- Germans reached Mame river in Septetmber, but British mobilized quickly
    - General Joseph Joffre led French and British to victory at First Battle of the Marne
    - Stalemate as neither could move the other party in trenches (trench warfare)
#### War in the East
- Russian army lost in Battles of Tannenberg, establishing reputation of German Paul von Hindenberg + Erich Ludendorff.
- Austrians defeated in Galicia and Serbia, Italians attacked Austria too.
- Germans helped and fought back Russians 300 miles in Galicia, finally in September 1915 eliminated Serbia.
### 1916-1917: The Great Slaughter
- Huge amounts of trenches separated by no-man's land, ppl ran in but that didn't work
- 700,000 men died in diff wars from trench warfare in a few square miles of land
#### Daily Life in the Trenches
- Batterns not orderly, ppl lost bearings, soldiers rushed randomly into battle
- Poison gas and terrible living conditions, regular times for things, boredom.
- Live and let live system evolved + produced humorous magazines (memes)
### The Widening of the War
- Ottomans came on Germany's side, British wanted to open Balkans but failed at Gallipoli, Italians bad.
#### A Global Conflict
- Lawrence had Arabs revolt against Ottomans, British wrecked Ottomans.
- Allies seized German colonies in Africa (German commander Vorbeck kept fighting  for four years)
- In Africa + Rhineland occupation, mostly African soldiers for Allies. Used for labor too
- Educated Africans wanted equality, and got involved in anticolonialism.
- Japan joined allies and seized German territory in Asia.
#### Entry of the United States
- Naval conflict between Germany + Britain (Germans won in combat at Battle of Jutland in 1916)
- Britain put blockades on Germany, Germany did likewise, and started submarine warfare.
- US people were killed on Lusitania so Germans stopped their sub warfare.
- They returned to submarine warfare when Admiral Holtzendorff convinced WIlliam II.
- Americans were brought into the war giving Allies psychological boost when needed.
### A New Kind of Warfare
- Airplanes used in 1915, w/ machine guns mounted and German zeppelins bombed London + east England.
    - Zeppelins filled with hydrogen were blown up quickly
#### Tanks
-British used tanks first, weren't very effective until British Mark V model in 1918 (super effective)
- These tactics were later used in World War II
### The Hoome Front: The Impact of Total War
- Centralization of govt. powers + economic regimentation + manipulation of public opion to keep war going.
### Political centralization + Economomic Regimentation
- Needed more patriotism to keep war going
- Even Great Britain was forced to do conscription despite opposition
- Govt. rationed food price, wages, and rent and nationalized transport systems + industries (national army was everyone)
- Germany was best at total war w/ Walter Rathneau (head of General Electric) to organize War Raw Materials Board providing goods where needed.
- Germany sucked at rationing food b/c of blockades and many died from hunger
- Army leaders Hindenburg + Ludendorff -> Auxilary Service Law = mandatory work
- British govt. was forced to take active role and David Lloyd Geroge, Minister of Munitions produced war material, rationed supplies, imposed rent control.
- French were bad b/c of German occupation of NE France (no coal + steel), military + civils struggled w/ each other.
- Georges Clemencau in 1917 maintained civilian control of total war govt.
- Russia + Austria-Hungary not capable of making war material and sent unarmed men.
#### Public Order and Public Opinion
- Many strikes errupted in latter two years of war (Irish Republican Brotherhood occupied Dublin - Easter Rebellion.
- Liberals + socialists opposed war calling for peace w/o territory. Czech leaders wanted Czech state.
- Needed police force to subdue populations via British Defence of the Realm Act (censorship + terrorism prevention)
- French govt. initially lenient about war opposition but after Clemencau left civil liberties supressed.
- Initially propaganda easy, but it needed to get better.
#### The SOcial Impact of Total War
- Patriotic wrokers got trade unions + benefited labor, and led to collective bargaining.
- More roles for women in clerical jobs as well as in factories (armament works)
- Men resisted women in work force at lower wwages, and France established min wage for women in textiles but not equal.
- Women's jobs considered temporary and wages lowered after WW1
- Women gained suffrage in Germany + Austria + US after the war and became socially emancipated.
- WW1 = social leveler, but junior officers + unskilled peasants were hit hard in population
- PM David Lloyd Geroge thought war ended class conflict, small firms shut down to lack of resources
- Inflation caused by full employment + high demand for goods, but sucked for unskilled workers.
- Middle class ppl hit hard by inflation and many did worse after war than skilled laborers.
