## War and Revolution
- Countries were collapsing unders tress but Russia was the only one to go through revolution.
### Russian Revolution
- People were mad after tsar revoked political concessions of Rev of 1905
- Serbian peasant Rasputin controlled Nicholas's wife Alexandra who isolated Nicholas from ppl's outrage
- Rasputin was assasinated after his interventions led to economic disasters but it was too late.
#### The March Revolution
- In Petrograd (Leningrad) working women in line for bread ration led protest on Mar 8 (Women's Day)
- Nicholas's wife convinced him to stop protests, led to Duma assuming govt. responsibilty (no tsar)
- Constiutional Democrats responsible for new govt. responsible to soviets (council of workers)
- Soviets had Marxxist SDP w/ Mensheviks + Bolsheviks (Mensheviks more democratic, Bolsheviks = single leader)
- Bolsheviks led by VI Lenin (against tsar super Marxist) were v violent
- Lenin released April Theses which were a plan for direct socialism, articulating p pl's discontent.
- Provisional govt. couldn't control ppl after issue of Army ORder No. 1 = military chaos
#### The Bolshevik Revolution
- Lenin falsely accused fleed, but Kerensky became PM of of govt. and release Bolsheviks from prison
- Bolsheviks had majority in the soviets and w/ Leon Trotsky and Russian Congress of Soviets transferred power to the Soviet govt. the Council of People's Commissars w/ Lenin as head.
- Lenin overpowered Constituent Assembly who were "against bourgeouise"
- Lenin nationalized land, giving peasant support, Lenin gave factories to committees of workers
- Alexandra Kollontai pushed women's rights + social welfare, an established Zhenotdel - women's bureau (but reform undone later)
- Russia gae up eastern Poland, Ukraine, Finland to try and get peace but civil war instead.
#### Civil War
- Bolshevik (Red) Army fought Alexander Kolchak, Ukrainians, Denikin (White = Anti-Bolshevik)
- Royal family murdered during Civil War
- Read army succeeded b/c of drafts + strict policies in army + disunity of anti-Communists
- War communism was useful in centralization, Checka (red police) reigned terror everywhere
- Allies in Russia after war were anti-Bolshevik, which led ppl to trust Bolsheviks more lol
- In 1921, Communists retained control of Russia as a beauracratically centralized state w/ one party
### The Last Year of the War
- Ludendorf made big push in Second Battle of Marne, but got defeated and used up his reserves
- Germany had to be liberal to get peace, started liberalism -> socialism and Wilhelm II was out.
#### The Casualties of War
- Birth rate went totally down and a lost generation, accustomed to war formed
- Civilians died from starvation and war, Turkish govt. commited mass genocide of Armenians.
### Revolutionary Upheavals in Germany and AUstria-Hungary
- In November Revolutions in Germany, Social Democrats picked up pieces w/ parliamentary demoacry
    - Radicals formed Independent SDP w/ Karl Liebknecht + ROsa Luxemburg = German Communist Party
- Radicals failed to get control, Elbert and moderate socialists made army of Free Corps to crush rebels creating fear of communism
- Nationalistic forces brought Austro Hungary down into Austria, Hungary, Czechoslovakia -> Yugoslavia
- Hungary had social revolution where Bela Kun established Communist state which was crushed1
