## 26.1 - An Uncertain Peace
### The Impact of World War I
- War memorials + ceremonies to honor the dead after WW1 + lots of young ppl died
- Some veterans became pacifits but others became nationalistic and were eager for more fighting
### The Search for Security
- Peace settlement left countries unahappy esp. w/ Eastern Border (Germans wanted to revise peace)
- League of Nations failed as US didn't join and it didn't maintain peace, punishments = trade embargos were ineffective.
- French felt alone w/o League + US defense and didn't disarm, compensated for Russia w/ alliances in Eastern Europe but these weren't Russia.
#### The French Policy of Coercion
- French fearful for safety, had tough policy of reparations on Germany
- Germany payed their first year of reparations to the Allied Reparations Commision but failed 2nd
- French govt. occupied Germany in the Ruhr valley to get reparations from the land.
- Germany printed money resulting in heavy inflation of German mark.
- French didn't gain more from occupation tan the cost, and US + Brits forced French out.
### The Hopeful Years (1924-1929)
- Gustav Stresemann ended inflation w/ the Retenmark and followed through w/ Versailles treaty.
- Dawes Plan (named after American banker) reduced reparations and stabalized German payments.
### The Spirit of Locarno
- American's invested in Europe + The Dawes Plan -> Prosperity for Europe
- Treaty of Locarno guaranteed Germany's western borders (France + Belgium) but not Poland
- Germany entered League of Nations, in Kelogg-Briand pact 63 nations renounced war but no punishments for violation.
- Germany only went into these things cuz they couldn't do otherwise, disarmament failed everywhere.
#### Coexistence w/ Soviet Russia
- By 1924 countries coexisted w/ Soviet Russia but Western powers remained suspicious.
### The Grerat Depression
- War strengthened buisness, labor unions, etc. but this was based on free trade so protectionism and trade barriers wrecked this.
#### Causes
- Agricultural prices declined rapidly b/c of overproduction and coal prices fell b/c of oil and hydroelectric power.
- European prosperity dropped as American investors moved capital from Germany to New York stock.
- The Credit-Anstalt (Vienna bank) collapsed in May 31, 1931 and general unemployment reigned.
#### Unemployment
- Unemployed + homeless filled the streets (they were everywhere)
#### Social and Political Repercussions
- Women secured low-paying jobs while men begged at home + young men joinoed gangs
- Great Depression increased govt. involvement and Marxist tendencies (Marx predicted fall of capitalism w/ overproduction)
- People moved to simplistic solutions like fascism as a scapegoat.
