## 26.2 - The Democratic States in the West
- Democracy expanded, some granted women suffrage, and women entered politics.
### Great Britain
- Great Britain suffered after war, industrial markets lost to US + Japan, David Lloyd Geroge couldn't fix this.
- Labour party became #2 party w/ Liberal support allowing Ramsay MacDonald to be 1rst Labour PM
- Conservatives led Brits to recovery under Stanley Baldwin, but they still suffered
- Coal miners esp. bad had national strike and were forced back to work for worst hours lower wages
- Second labour govt. came to power but failed, National Government (Liberals + Conservatives together) brought Brit out of depression w/ budgets and tariffs.
- John Maynard Keyes condemned lassiez faire saying govt. should increase public works in depression
### France
- France was strongest European power, solved financial problems and experienced prosperity
- Depression started in France in 1932
    - Six cabinets formed in 19 months and right-wing groups were fascists and marched/demonstrated
    - Riots began and ppl believed extremists would seize power, leading to popular front 
- Popular Front was coalition of Socialists + Radicals, Socialist Leon Blum was PM
    - Started French New Deal (collective bargaining, 40 hour week, two week paid vacation, min wage)
    - Popular Front didn't solve depression and France had declining confidence in politics.
### The Scandanavian States
- Sweden, Denmark, Norway, and Finland were very socialist and avoided pitfalls of communism and capitallism.
- Scandanavian govts. had high taxes + beauracracies but enterprieses prospered.
### The United States
- FDR won 1932 election in a landslide and pursued "New Deal" to bring economic relief + reform.
    - Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation insured safety of bank deposits < $5000
    - Federal Emergency Relief Administration helped states + communities meet homeless needs.
    - Civilian Conservation Corps employed > 2 mil. ppl in reforestation + road conservation projects
- These reforms only had slow recovery so 2nd New Deal instituted Works Progress Adminstration which employed 2-3 million ppl in public works.
- Social Security Act gave old-age pensions, National Labor Relations Act encouraged labor union growth.
- The New Deals averted social revolution in US but did not solve unemployment, but WWII brought US back later.
### European States and the World: The Colonial Empires
- Colonial empires gained by Brits + France after war, but unrest rose in Asian + African colonies
#### The Middle East
- Saudi Arabian govt. independent and Iraq got independence but Europen influence remaind strong.
- Britain planned to divide Ottoman territories but General Mustafa Kemal created Turkey.
    - Democratic system in place but no toleration of opposition + westernization
    - Women got rights + education, and Ataturk used nationalism ao create modern Turkish nation
#### India
- Gandhi began nonviolent movement to force the British to improve treatment of poor and grant independence.
- Spinningwheel symbol of resistance to British textiles (civil disobedience) and India built self govt. gradually
- Legislative coucnils built up, but main things under British control until after WW2
#### Africa
- Peace settlement gave German African colonies to British + French as mandates
- Africans who fought in war became active politically
- Workers organized trade unions in Nigeria and South Africa
- Protests were quelled w/ force, but also made reforms (too few and too late)
- W. E. B. Du Bois + Marcus Garvey led movements to make Africans aware of heritage and stressed unity for Africans respectively.
- Jomo Kenyatta in Facing Mount Kenya argued British rule was destroying African culture.
