### 26-3b Hitler and Nazi Germany
- Although their initial attempt at seizing power failed, Hitler + Nazis took over after 10 years.
#### Weimar Germany
- After WW1, a new democratic republic in Germany formed called Weimar w/ Hindenburg as president.
- Republic didn't change German govt. structure, army + instiutions indepndent.
- Middle class pushed into rightist parties after heavy inflation + Great Depression
#### The Emergence of Adolf Hitler
- Born in Vienna, wanting to be an artist during which he developed racism, nationalism, propaganda
- Was a dispatch runner on Western Front in WW1, and entered politics in Munich after war
#### The Rise of the Nazis
- Hitler took over National Socialist German Worker's Party -> Nazi Party
- Made into movement w/ flags, badges, uniforms, newspapers, militia = SA = Sturmabteilung = Storm Troops.
- When Weimar was about to collapse, Nazis marched on Berlin in Beer Hall Putsch but Hitler jailed.
- Hitler wrote Mein Kampf in prison combining nationalism, anti-Semitism, justifying authoritarian leadership with "Lebensraum" = living space.
#### Hitler's New Tactics
- Nazis realized need for constitutional rise to power under his Führerprinzip (leadership)
- Party was built up from national youths excited about active politics giving Nazis "dynamism"
- Before Nazis tried to get urbans on their side, now they targeted
- Chancellor Henrich Brunig relied on emergency decrees by Hindenburg for rule (parliament dead)
#### The Nazi Seizure of Power
- Nazis grew dramatically from 1930-1933 and they developed electioneering techniques
- They then subsequently lost seats, and Heisenburg made Hitler chancellor b/c of pressure from elites who thought they could control Hitler.
- Hermann Goring was made minister of interior and head of police, made police totally Nazi
- After fire set by Communists in Reichstag Hitler got emergency govt. power to suspend rights
- Nazis passed Enabling Act which got rid of constitution making Hitler a dictator.
- Nazis quickly enforced Gleichshaltung (insitutions under Nazi control) and purging of Jews in civil service.
- Two sources of danger to Hitler's authority armed forces and SA
    - the SA of his party under Ernst Rohm wanted second rev and criticized Hitler
    - Hitler solved both by assasinating SA leaders + Rohm in exchange for army support
#### The Nazi State
- Hitler developed a total Aryan state via mass demonstrations such as Nuremberg party rallies + Harvest Festivals at Buckeberg
- Nazi Germany constantly in conflict allowing Hitler to become ultimate decision maker
- Didn't nationalize means of production, public works + rearmaments employed to improve economy
- German Labor Front under Robert Ley used workbook
- The SS (Schutzstaffeln) or Protection Squads under Heinrich Himmler controlled all police forces.
    - A crusading order that used violence to further the ARyan master race
- Hitler Youth + German Girls Association members and Catholic Churches, schools, and univ. under Nazi state.
- Women were mothers naturally and recieved German Mother's Cross award for more children.
- Women encourgaed to pursue social work, nursing although during rearmament women worked more.
- Nazi boycotted Jewish businesses and excluded non-Aryans from certain professions
- Nuremburg laws separated Jews + Germans politically,  socially, and legally (forbade marriage)
- In Kristallnacht, assasination of secratary in German embassy by a Polish Jew led Nazis to burn synagogues and killed Jews
- Jews were barred from public buildings and from working or managing stores and sent to concentration camps
- Jews were encouraged to emigrate from Germany
