### The Soviet Union
- During civil war "war communism" in place govt. controlled everything, got food from peasants
- Industrial collapse and agricultural disaster b/c of great famine from 1920 to 1922
#### The New Economic Policy
- Peasants could sell produce openly, small industries could operate privately
- Lenin created new state = Union of Soviet Socialist Republics = USSR = Soviet Union
    - Brought famine + depression to end, but industries stagnated other than coal production
- State stronger, number of bureacurats increased creating new Elite, which Lenin was worried about
#### The Struggle for Power
- Lenin had a strokes -> death, and this lead to power struggle in Politburo
- Politburo was divided into "The Left" led by Leon Trotsky(commisar of war) who wanted to end NEP and industrialize
- "The Right" rejected world revolution, wanted to improve socialist state and keep NEP
- Joseph Stalin staged bank robbery for Bolsheviks, was "Party General Secretary" of Politburo
- Was good at organization, got to set regional secrataries and supported NEP (not Right though).
- Stalin gained complete control of the party, and murdered Trotsky on Stalin's orders
#### The Stalinist Era (1929-1939)
- Stalin shifted economic policy w/ first five-year plan which made Soviet Union an industrial state
- Social costs of industrialization were lowering wages and poor housing conditions
- Propaganda like Alexei Stakhanov who mined 102 tons of coal in a shift was used as an example to show sacrifice for socialist state.
- Capital by making collective farms and eliminating kulaks = wealthy farmers (Communist)
- Stalin collectivized into 250,000 farms, with cost of starving peasants but they got tiny gardens
- Stalin purged Old Bolsheviks and strengthened bureaucarcy sending opposers to labor camps (murder)
- Disturbed by falling birthrate, Stalin pulled back woman's rights and outlawed abortion + divorce
- Stalin added engineering higher education + part-time schools, education = step to success
### Authoritarianism in Eastern Europe
- The Eastern Europe diff after WW1 and most had parliamentary govt. but turned to authoritarianism
- Land mostly farmland fear of communist rev. -> authoritarianism adopted to maintain old system
- Coup d'etat in Bulgaria, Joseph Pilsudski created military dictatorship in Poland, King Alexander I imposed royal dictatorship in Hugoslavia, every parliament collapsed except Czechoslovakia.
- Admiral Miklos Horthy ruled Hungary as regent, appointed Julius Gombos as PM and brought Hungary close to Italy + Germany
- In Romania Corneliu Codreanu led fascist Legion of the ARchangel Micheal w/ Iron Guard but King Carol II ended parliamentary rule and crushed legion.
- General Ioannis Metaxas imposed dictatorship in Greece.
- Czechoslovakia maintained political democracy, Thomas Masaryk maintained stable alliance.
### Dictatorship in the Iberian Peninsula
- Spain + Portugal were agrarian and social tensions of industrial boom + inflation exploded.
- Miguel Primo de Rivera led a military coup w/ support of King Alfonso but Depression led to collapse.
- After ALfonoso left Spain, new Spanish republic formed and the Popular Front (anti-fascists) took over.
    - Was unacceptable to army officers (General Francisco Franco leading to bloody Spanish Civil War)
#### The Spanish Civil War
- On the left were Republicans + Pop Front in urban areas, right were Franco + Nationalists in rural
- GB, France, Germ, Ita, Sov Un signed a Nonintervention Agreement but Germany + Italy rejected it
    - Hitler tested new weapons in Guernica, Sovietes supported Republicans
    - Franco ended up winning and captured Madrid, ending the super blood war
#### The Franco Regime
- Fascist movement in Spain = Falange, led by Jose Antonio wasn't w/ conservative Franco
#### Portugal
- Portuguese overthrew monarchy established republic, but inflation lead to military coup by Antonio Salazar who controlled Portugal for forty years.
