## The Expansion of Mass Culture and Mass Leisure
- 1920s = "Roaring Twenties" for pop culture, Josephine Baker well known in Europe, and appeared in clubs w/ Jazz.
    - Symbol of the "flapper" = women of 1920s
- Jazz so popular it was Jazz Age, King Oliver, Bix Beiderbecke, Jelly Roll Morton, were great.
### Radio and Movies
- Guglielmo Marconi discovered radio waves and a concert was broadcast in June 16,1920 for first time
    - Mass production of radios and broadcasting facilities began in US, Europe, and Japan (BBC)
- Italian Quo Vadis and American Birth of a Nation released and cinema became popular.
- Hitler used radio to send propaganda everywhere and made radios cheaper w/ communal speakers.
- Nazi propag. minister Joseph Goebbels created films like Triumph of the Will showing power of socialism.
### Mass Leisure
- Eight hour day was norm
#### Sports
- Soccer World Cup contest added to nationalistic rivalries, stadium building.
#### Tourism
- Civilian travel possible b/c of WW1 plane innovations, beaches frequented
- In France, the Popular Front govt. gave paid vacations in the summer, in Italy + Germany leisure supported state.
- Colonials toured colonial spas, medicinal treatments, and hydrotherapy.
#### Organiozed Mass Leisure in Italy and Germany
- Mussolini's Dopolavoro was a national recreation agency + clubhouse , controlling spontaneous activity.
- Nazi's had Kraft durch Freude and had vacations, concerts, tours, and cruises.
- Mass culture + leisure created homogeneity and developed national state + mass politics
