## Cultural and Intellectual Trends in the Interwar Years
- Avant-garde culture, human beings violent animals, created a ton of uncertainty
- Women wore short skirts/ hair/ cosmetics and sexual pleasure emphasized describing anatomy.
### Nightmares and New Visions: Art and Music
- Abstract painting became popular, fantastic nightmarish landscapes from WW1 battlefronts.
#### German Expressionists
- Expressionism focused on suffering and shattered lives after the war (George Grosz + Otto Dix)
#### The Dada Movement
- Dadaism is the expression of rebellion against art and stuff
- Hanna Hoch was female member of Berlin Dada Club, used photomontage
#### Functionalism in Architecture
- Buildings had a specific social function, esp. in Chicago where Sullivan built functional skyscrapers
- Sullivan's pupil Frank Lloyd Wright became known for innovative architectural designs.
- Bauhaus school of art in Weimar Germany by Walter Gropius who made buildings objects of future
#### A Popular Audience
- Kurt Weill began to compose classical music + jazz
- Erwin Piscator began directing career to workers on picket lines
#### Art in Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union
- Hitler condemned modern art as it was lacking skill and Jewish ppl could do it, he made German Realism.
- Socialist realism was used as well intendng to inculcate social values useful to regimes
#### Schonberg Atonal
Schonberg created new twelve note system of composition
### The Seearch for the Unconscious in Literature
- Stream-of-conciousness was used in James Joyce's Ulysses
- Virginia Woolf belonged to Bloomsbury Circle and created artistic literary forms like Mrs. Dalloway + Jacob's Room.
- German Hermann Hesse dealt w/ unconciousness and reflected Carl Jung's psychological theories
- Demian studied incest, Steppenwolf mirrored confusion of existence, Hesse made impact on German youth
### The Unconcious in Psychology: Carl Jung
- Carl Jung studied dreams and diverged from Freud, unconscious was opening to deep spirtual needs for Jung
- Jung viewed unconcious as personal unconcious + collective unconciousness the ladder being  of archetypes, mental forms, and dream images.
- Archetypes common to all ppl create myths, religions, philosophes
- Unconciousness and archetypes brought mind to higher state of conciousness
### Heroic Age of PHysics
- Max Planc + Einstein's work continued by Ernest Rutherford who discovered atom could be split.
- Heisenberg upset the belief of predictability w/ his uncertainty principle
