### Revisionist History Paragraph
I think history should reflect the reality, that Winston Churchill had his light and dark sides, and like all human beings wasn't either entirely perfect or horribly flawed. It is hard to and shouldn't be denied that Churchill was a brilliant leader who knew how to inspire his people. Spievogel claimed that when London was bombed by the German Luftswaffen, Churchill didn't cower in shelters but built up the people's resolve by walking freely in the streets. These actions as an inspirational leader helped to create  However, he did make mistakes. In the tactical field when it came to making important decisions in the war, Churchill often fell short by taking advice from irreputable sources. Like Alexandra Feodorovna taking ill advice from Rasputin, Churchill took advice from his friend and physicist: Frederick Lindemann, a Physics professor. Under his guidance, the podcast claims Churchill made disasterous decisions like refusing to send food to the colonies in India causing the Great Bengal Famine of 1943 and the failed bombing of Berlin. In this sense, Churchill failed massively by putting his trust in the wrong people and not following the strict hierarchy of beuracracy in British government when making his decisions. Additionally, Churchill had his own personal faults, biases, and bigotry. The Washington Post stated that Churchill once trumpeted "I hate Indians, they are a beastly people with a beastly religion." These horrid words are not characteristic of the heroic character we know and love, yet they are a part of him. As all people, characters, and things do; Churchill's character lies somewhere in the path of a Hegelian pendulum. Churchill should be judged for his distinct characteristics, contributions, and failures as all humans should be.
